Hello, it's 230 classes started. Let's join the class on the portal and let's get started. Cool. So what did we study last time? I think we had covered solving business use cases using Pandas and Nampai, right? Pandas and Nampai was already covered. Today we're going to start with solving analytics case studies through data visualization, specifically using MATLAB and C-BON. So what are MATLAB and C-BON? This was covered in the last time I said, right? Cool. Tell me then what's MATLAB and C-BON? Okay. Libraries for plotting. Floating. Graphs for visualization. Cool. So what type of plots or what type of graphs are you folks aware of? Yeah. So something for take it here. Okay. I heard one histogram. What else? Bar graphs. Okay. What else? Okay. What else? Box plot. And screen is not shared? Oh, I think. Okay. Box plot. Cool. Box plot. What else? Scatter plot. Cool. Anything else? Line chart. Very good. What else? Sorry? What else? That's all. There are a lot more, but okay. We have covered a good range for now. Now let me ask you, what is histogram use for? Like, why do I draw histogram? What problem does it solve? What about that? What about continuous data? Okay. Range of data. What else? What else does histogram tell me? Frequency. Cool. What else? Very important thing related to data distribution. Sorry? What about access? Related to frequency. Yeah. Did someone say? Be a little louder. Sorry? Why? Why access? No. I mean, okay. Access is fine, but what information does that give me? You mentioned free range of data. Looking at histogram, I can get what is the minimum? What is the maximum? It tells you the frequency across various bins like what is the frequency of data points given to you? What else does histogram tell me? Okay. Tell me this. I'm drawing a histogram, right? I'll draw two histograms. Okay. So these are two histograms. What does each of them tell me? Like, what's the difference between the two? Yes. One is left skewed. Which one is left skewed? Which one is right skewed? First one is left skewed. Are you sure? Sorry? So you're saying this is left skewed. So that means this is right skewed. Okay. Let's check that. What is skewed? By the way? Sorry? A tilt or a shift? So this is a right skewed distribution, but let's say when looking at this, you folks told me this is left skewed. So is that correct? So skewness is basically, you can tell from the tail, right? If you look at the first chart, look at the first chart, it's tail like the long part is actually on the right. So this is a right skewed distribution. On the other hand, for the chart that is at the bottom, if tail is actually on the left side. So this is a left skewed distribution. Is this clear? Is the difference clear? Any confusion? So you told me that skewness, right? So can I not say that histogram also tells me the skewness of the data? Yes or no? So skewness is another property or another kind of information that I can infer from a histogram. What is like, what do I need? Why should I infer skewness? Like, what does it tell me? What information? Like looking at the first chart, what does it tell you? Let's say this is, let's take some example. Views. Views on your posts, right? Or clicks. Views are clicks. Something like that. So what information does this tell me? What I can infer from about views from this chart? Sorry? So this information, this only tells me the frequency of views. It does not tell me anything about the video in general. So what you can say is yes. Outliers is one thing, but it can also tell you that majority of my views are in this range, right? This is only very few people. Let's say this is million views, one million and this is let's say 10,000, right? So if I plot the views of all my videos as he mentioned, majority of my views lie in this range 10,000 or less than that. Only a few videos have reached kind of a million views. So that's what I can infer from a histogram. Is that clear to everyone? Any questions? By the way, am I audible to everyone even at the back? Everybody can hear me, right? Cool. So is this clear? Skewness? Okay. Now coming to the next bar graph, what does bar graph tell me? What does bar graph tell me? I said even before that, how many variables can I represent on a histogram? Sorry? Did someone say something? How many variables can I represent on for a histogram? Two. Think again. How many variables do you see in this chart? Like what is the variable here? Variable is that something that changes? What is changing here? Well, if views are changing, right? So histogram is a univariate plot. I can plot only single variable. So this is a univariate chart. I can analyze the frequency of any single variable. It could be views, it could be clicks, it could be salaries, income, population. So only one variable. Y axis is not a variable. So y axis tells you the count or frequency as you mentioned. So what is the frequency of let's say bin? This is the first bin. This is the second bin, third bin, so on. How many people are whatever count or frequency you have? What is the value for this particular bin? Let's say this is bin 1. So this will be the value 1. So this simply tells me how many people or how many views kind of belong into this bucket. So this is not a variable. This is the frequency of that particular bin. So it's a univariated graph. Only one variable can come. Is this clear? Any questions, any confusions? Why is it one variable and not two? Cool. Now coming to bar graph, yeah. What does bar graph tell me? Where can I use bar graph and what for? Can anyone think of an example? Anyone? Can bar graph is used for discrete? Okay. But can I not somehow represent some kind of continuous value? Comparison between two. Comparison between both. Okay, okay. Tell me how many branches do you have? At scalar, how many branches do you have? CS. Sorry? AI? Business. Okay, let's take three for example. Right? These are your branches. You know your seniors from third or fourth year? Third year seniors, you know, how is the status of internships stipend? How much have your peers, your seniors, rough range, you know, like CS like what would be the maximum value or what would be the average value according to average? Let's take 75k. What about AI? 90k? What about business? Zero. Okay, let's take 50k for example. So now, can I not represent this information with the help of bar graph? On x-axis, I can plot your branches, compute designs, AI, business. And on the y-axis, I can plot their average or mean salaries. Right? So 75 would be somewhere here. 90 would be here. Business like 50 should be here. 75, 90 and let's say 50. So this is where I can use a bar graph. Now, notice one thing, this has two variables, salaries and branches. Now this salary could be something else as well, right? Number of students, how many students are in the CS branch, how many students in the AI branch, how many students in the business branch or number of internship of course, number of placement of first would have been there. So this has two variables. So this is a bi-variate chart, right? And some of you mentioned, one of you mentioned that it is used for discrete variables partially correct. Okay, on x-axis, I can represent discrete or categorical variable. But on the y-axis, I can compare it with the continuous value like salary as well. Right? I've used average salary, you can do maximum, you can do minimum also, or you can do median also. So this is an example where I can use a bar chart. Is this clear? Any questions anyone? Any confusions? Now there can be an alternate version of it as well, which is called horizontal bar chart. Nothing, the fund is not different. It's just that that is inverted. Like your branches would come here, CS, AI and business and your salary bucket or average salary would come on the x-axis. So then the chart would look something like this. So this is a horizontal bar chart, bar h, right? So concept is same, x-axis are inverted. So nothing, nothing important or nothing different there. Is this clear? Cool, quickly coming to the next pie chart. Now, what do I use pie chart for? Right, percentage of proportions, I can use pie chart to represent percentages or proportion of the data set, right? Just the way like in a histogram, y-axis has your frequency right or count. One x-axis is the value. If I want to represent that in percentage of proportion form, I can do that using let's say pie chart or even if I have to kind of do the distribution of number of students between CS, AI and business, I can do that using a pie chart, right? Let's say 60% or 40% of students are CS, 40% are business and 20% are AI. So percentages or proportions can be represented using pie chart. Now, tell me, is this a univariate or bivariate? Univariate or bivariate? Univariate? Why univariate? Speak a little louder. Bivariate. Why, bivariate? Those who are saying bivariate, why, those who are saying univariate, why? It is showing, be a little loud, doesn't matter, right or wrong, speaking is the main thing. Branch? Branch is an percentage, okay? So his argument for bivariate is that you have branches as well as percentage. Those who are saying univariate, why univariate? Yeah, so basically there's only one variable called branch and what you're saying percentage is not a different variable. It's basically proportion of branches or percentage of branch only. What is the percentage distribution of branch? So there is no other variable than branch. CS, AI and business only branch is represented in this chart. As I was explaining in histogram as well, frequency is not actually a variable. It tells you the count. It tells you the count of this particular bin. How many values are present in this particular bin? Similarly, pi chi tells you what is the percent and what is the proportion of whatever variable, count, right? What is the percentage of students in this particular branch? What is the percentage or how many times? You can say how many times CS occurs? 40% of the time CS occurs. 40% of the time business occurs and 20% of the time AI occurs. Is this clear? Cool. What about box plot? What does box plot tell me? Be a little out. I can hear murmuring like outliers. What is IQ? What is that? What is that? What does it mean? Again, I did not ask a full form. What does it mean? Middle word. See, you are throwing a lot of buzzwords. So let me give you a feedback. Whenever somebody asks you technical questions, it is always nice to explain to them intuitively. That tells you that you actually understand what the concept means and not just throwing technical or technical jargon to them. So learning definitions is not the skill. Learning the concept is the skill. So basically box plot tells you a five number summary. Five number summary. What five numbers it tells me? The minimum value? The 25th percentile. 25th percentile. That means first 25% of the data. Third, 50th percentile, which is also known as the median. Then fourth, 75th percentile, the value below which 75% of the data lies. Similarly, 25th percentile is the value below which 25% of the data lies. Fifth, the maximum value. Actually, what will be the percentile for maximum? 100th percentile because 100 percent of the data lies below the max value. So this is the 100th percentile. What about the min value? What will be the percentile for this? Zero because there is nothing below minimum, right? So this is the zeroth percentile. So these five numbers is given by the box plot or you also call this five numbers. Somebody and I are some of you were mentioning IQR. So IQR is nothing but the difference between this fourth and the second value. 75th percentile or this is also known as third quartile, Q3 and this is Q1. So the difference between these two values. So basically this tells you exactly where the center of your distribution like what is the range of the center of your value, right? The middle of the values. This is how you kind of represent a box plot. So this is your min value and this is your max value. This is your median value. This represents 25th percentile. This represents 75th percentile. And anything below this or anything beyond this. So one second, I think I have done it wrong. This should be 75th and this should be 25th. This should be min and this should be max. Sorry. This is max. This is min. This is 25th. This is 75th. Now anything beyond the max, anything below the min, these are your outliers. These are your outliers. Cool. How are these outliers calculated? Does anyone know? How are these outliers calculated? Sorry. Percentile of what? Anyone? Okay. Good. So this is the formula for calculating outliers. You can go home and figure out why exactly 1.5 is used. Does anyone know why 1.5 is used? Why not 2? Why not 3? Why not 1? Why only 1.5? There must be a reason, right? Somebody woke up and just decided 1.5 randomly. Thank you. Let me share you a medium blog, who calculating outliers using IQR medium. Let me find that this is a very good blog and medium that tells you why exactly 1.5 is used. I will share it offline. You can go home and research. But it's good to know why 1.5 is used. So it's a homework for you. Figure out why 1.5 is used across both the quarters to calculate IQR, the outliers. Everything we do, there's a scientific reason behind it. So nothing comes out of random. For example, does anybody know how to identify outliers using these course? How do we identify or how do we identify using standard deviations? If this is my kind of normal distribution, how do I identify outliers? Will it loud? So x minus mu upon sigma, this will give you z score. He can. So this is for hypothesis testing. How can I use the z scores to identify whether a data point is an outlier or not? Have you heard that if it's a normal distribution and the data lies beyond three standard deviations? Y3, Y02, Y01. Because more than 99% of the data kind of comes between plus minus three standard deviations. So anything beyond that is considered as an outlier. So go home, figure out why 1.5 is used. There's a scientific reason behind it. Cool. Any questions? Anyone? Any doubts? Any questions? Cool. So the box plot is done. What is scatter plot? What is scatter plot? scatter plot? scatter plot? scatter plot? Why do I need a scatter plot? What is the use case? Any examples? Anything? Any examples? Any use case? So scatter plot is used for analyzing the relation between two continuous values. So scatter plot, relation between two continuous values. Right? Relation or correlation you can also say. For example, ice cream sales and temperature. Right? Or cold ring sales and temperature. You plot the data. Right? So here, generally when summer comes, the sales of ice cream kind of or cold rings kind of end to increase as compared to winter seasons. So I can figure out the relationship or correlation between two continuous values using scatter plot. Now tell me is this bivariate or univariate? By variate because there are two different variables involved. Ice cream sales and temperature is another variable. That as temperature changes, what is the change I'm observing in ice cream sales? But can I be 100% sure that it's because of the ice cream sales that it's because of the temperature my ice cream sales are increasing? Is that always the case? Why no? There can be multiple reasons, right? So there's one very important statement, correlation does not mean causation. Right? So there can be multiple factors involved that cause something. Right? There can be multiple factors that could cause the increase of ice cream sales. It could be like the price is slash to half. Right? Magnum comes like 100 bucks and they're selling it for 20 rupees. So the sales you can expect it to shot up, right? So it has nothing to do with the temperature. So correlation need not mean causation. There could be multiple variables or multiple other factors that could contribute for the cause of a particular event. Is this clear? So this tells me correlation. Specifically Pearson correlation. We can calculate between two continuous variables. Any questions any doubts in this or any other thing that you're sharing till now? Any doubts anyone? I hope this screen is clearly visible to everyone. Let me also look at the chat here if anybody is asking. I can see six. Okay. Cool people were answering. Okay. Cool. Any doubts? Any questions anyone? Any confusion? Everybody clear? Okay. So this was very basic or basics of data visualization. Now let's quickly move to a quick case study where we'll try to you know try to answer some business questions or try to plot these charts in a business setting. So let me quickly share this notebook with you. You'll have a view access to it. Maybe you can you'll need to kind of create a copy of it. Oh in fact I cannot myself and let me create a new copy myself. Okay. I can call it visualization. Okay. So let me share this with you on the chat. So there's a question by Prince. Therefore one temperature are their different sales. So there can be right for one temperature. They can be different sales. Yes. By the way why could it be? Why does anyone can't even think why there can be multiple sales for one temperature? Anyone can think why? Okay. No worries. Okay. Okay. No problem. Let's come back. Let's come back. Let's come back answering this question. Why multiple sales for one temperature? It's a good question like he asked. Why multiple sales for one temperature? But sales is total number row. How many ice creams did I sell? So if two people are having at the same temperature they will total two units that were sold. So sales is already a sum. How many units I sold? Right. So you're saying two people are having at the same temperature. So at the same for that particular temperature that will be counted as two anyway. So I sold two units of that. One of them got sick. So the answer to the question is time. There's a third variable in what called time. Right. Let's say day one day two. Right. 50 degrees Celsius. 50 degrees. We have almost reached. 50 degrees Celsius. Day one the sales were three units. But on the day two sales was let's say just two units. So at the same temperature there can be different sales. Why? Because then a third factor comes into the picture which is time. At different point in time sales can be different. So here if you look at it here if you look at it you are not plotting it on the chart that does not mean that the variable does not exist. Let's plot this chart again. So temperature sales day. Right. If you kind of use it this way 35 40 40 60 sales is three units two units seven units 11 units so day one day two day three day four. So now if you just want to consider these two right you can do an operation like group by temperature. Group by temperature and take the sum of the sales then in that case you are left with unique unique values of temperature right 35 is three 40 is now two plus seven that is nine 60 is 11. Now if you plot the chart only for this then in that case yes you will not have multiple sales. But if you just plot for this this data include exclude the day for now just plot the data for plot the chart for this data these data points here I can see that for the same data point or for same temperature there are two units of sale two different sales unit. So how would this start look like let's say this is sales or let's say this is temperature this is sales so 35 40 and 60 so 35 the units is three so chart would come like this 40 there are two units two and seven and 60 there is 11 units so for even for a given day I give a given temperature there can be multiple units but if you plot for this chart like for this data 35 40 60 39 11 so 35 is three 40 is nine this is 11 so even if you consider or you don't consider the day variable you can still represent multiple units for the same temperature is it clear any other question anyone? So the follow-up question by principle how are we going to make sure it accounts for any third variable so if you have the data you can look at it but then if you have any a third variable then the only way to account for it is kind of plotting a third axis so you can plot 3D charts as well sales temperature and day right you can plot a 3D chart of these three variables and then you can account for the third variable now you can ask if there are the fourth variable in all fifth variable in all then the answer to that question is you cannot physically represent that because human beings can only infer three variables you can account for multiple variables using machine learning but you will not be able to visualize it because you can only visualize till three dimensions is that clear or you can do multiple charts one could be sale versus temperature sales versus day and day versus temperature that could be one way to grasp that information or comprehend that information or one way could be to look at these spreadsheets if it's a large scale then looking at it won't make sense you'll have to do multiple charts but then you'll have to do different kind of approaches to infer that data is that clear? Any other question anyone? Cool. Okay so now we're going to look at a case study where we'll try to plot these charts in a business setting so very brief introduction about the map role and see born a different type of libraries for visualization so first thing I'm importing the two libraries this is again very basic I hope everybody is aware of what are the different types of data numerical and categorical what is the numerical data type numerical continuous data what is continuous data so there are two type of data continuous or numerical and the other one is categorical so what is the difference between the two what is a numerical or continuous data examples in teacher not exactly I mean I can represent let's say if I have to represent 1 to 5 like 1 2 3 4 5 schools right you have schools in schools their classes first class second class first let's say consider it all the 12 classes I can consider it as a categorical variable also because there are fixed set of values continuous is something that is more you know sorry hide so something that is without any breaks as such right as you mentioned hide somebody can be 150 centimeter tall somebody can be 150 point 100 centimeter tall somebody can be 160 centimeter tall so on and so forth so here you see there is no break it break it as such I can go up to any precision point I want to so this is an example of continuous value categorical can be discrete bins or discrete values as I mentioned classes 1 to 5 or it could be your branches C S A I and business they are fixed 3 branches right so fixed 3 bins or buckets or categories so this is the difference between continuous and categorical any questions in this any doubts anyone oh this was not on here okay good any questions or this any doubts any confusion so these are very basics of data analytics okay or in a law or in a are you guys aware of this what is or in a law or in a so categorical data can be divided into two parts or in a law or in a law or in a law you know what order means so ordinal right the world comes from the word order so any category that has order classes 1 to 5 right that is ordered class 1 is the smallest class 2 is bigger than class 1 3 4 and 5 school class right stool standards so this has an order in it so this is a ordinal categorical variable does C S A I have business as any order can I say C S is greater than A I or business is greater than A I or business greater than C I can I can I put it in any order so that means this is non ordinal or nominal or yeah is this clear cool again now come into the case study so you are a data scientist at tension games it's a company that makes video games you need to analyze what kind of games the company should create in order to perform better in the market so you need to advise them what type of games they should create so that they could increase their say increase their profits so on so forth so first things first we get the data we're downloading the data from Google Drive I think we have discussed what W get means in the previous sessions we're kind of fetching the data so now quickly let's check so if the data file is present I'm importing pandas and empire to handling the or storing the initial data so here we see I've loaded the file using the readc sp function and the head is showing me first five rows so what is what are different type of variables or values I can see I can see a column called rank okay then this name of the game platform on what platform does it was it is it available ps3 ps2 so on so forth here what year was it launched genre what's the genre of the game publisher who's the publisher basically the brand that creates company that creates the game nacl sounds like North America sales e sales the European sales JP could be Japan sales other sales like other other countries and global could be the sum of all these values so basically this these products check the sales of the game this tells you who's the publisher what the genre or the real record to put don't tell me what are the categorical variables you see in this data what are the categorical variables genre okay platform okay name and publisher what about here what about here categorical okay so columns like these are values like these kind of fall in the gray area you can consider it as categorical you can consider it as continuous as well let's say if it starts from year 1800 right and it has a video data like 800 and even 1 and 2 so it's 1.2 plus 26 there are a bit too many values right too many categories to consider so in that case it kind of doesn't make sense to you know have them as discrete categories you can treat this as continuous as well if the range of the values are too high but in the end of this speaking each year is kind of one category of a total potential category as well so this kind of falls in a gray area so it away it's both is that clear name is how can you read name as continuous yes well it's very quite there are too many names then but here I have an option I have an option to get a free to read it as a continuous value I can do that right but in that case there's no option it's string values cool any other question any other doubt again buddy cool what about sales I think everybody is clear that this is a continuous value right not very value of being Japanese sales whatever so this is a continuous value cool ah ah I think ordinary and nominal should be able to figure out which is a ordinal variable which is a nominal variable based on the rank now quickly let's look at syntaxes how to create a basic plot or a simple line chart using mad per lip so we just want to point plot these three points 0 comma 3 1 comma 5 2 comma 9 I hope everybody is aware that the first represents the x axis second represents the y axis so it's in the form of x comma y so I can simply create two different lists one that represents the x values another that represents the y values and then I can simply plot it using plt dot plot this plot by default gives me a line chart right a simple line chart on the x axis you have 0 1 2 like it's broken into bins you can change that into hard values also and your y axis represents your simply the y values any questions in this any doubts in this syntax or the chart by default if you notice it is kind of breaking it into discrete bins or like bin z error at feeds interval like and it difference of 0.25 0.25 you can change this if you want if you want just these hard coded values 0 1 2 you can do that we'll see how we can customize or style your chart but this is by default you can change that any question in this syntax or the chart any doubts anyone cool uh now let's look at the anatomy of your mat plot lip or a chart in general let's be plotted here for better visibility so that's this is the structure what mat plot lip gives you so this whole thing right this whole okay let's go from inside to outside first things you see is your axis right axis tells me post axis tells me there's a first start second axis tells me there's a second chart if you're third foot I can plot that as well so axis a x yes right a x yes tells me what is the number what is the position of the chart they can be multiple charts enough figure so what is the position of that subtitle can be basically abroad broad definition of the broad description of what this analysis is showing right one could be your uh sales against temperature or another could be sales against price change so this can be something like a broad definition saying how sales change in respect to multiple variables so broad title or a broad description or the whole figure the figure is the complete entirety or the complete structure of this if there are multiple charts all of them combined in a single figure then x label by label I think it's pretty clear x label means what is your x axis label of the x axis by label what is the label of your y axis then title tells you what is the title of the specific chart like for example this one would be sales versus temperature the second the time could be sales versus price change that will be the title of the specific chart any questions in this are in the any doubts which is uh technical definitions or technical terms any confessions by the way everybody clear cool so yeah this is how your chart could look like or a figure could look like I have written the definitions of or basic explanation for each of these you can go home and read this yeah now comes the important question how to choose the right plot this is where your brain unit to apply your brains how to choose the right plot if I if I ask you this question what will be your answer okay type of variables okay what are the type of variables continuous or categorical can there be one step above this can there be one more step above this yes number of variables so before this number of variable should come so first step could be number of variables right if there's one then you can call it unit variate if there is two you can call it bi variate if there are more than two then it's called multi variate right depending upon this your next question could be as you mentioned what is the type of variables is it a continuous value or is it a categorical value similarly are that variables so here there is continuous and categorical can I also just say continuous and categorical or the third axis could also come here or a third arrow could also come here what would be the third arrow very good very good they can be three combinations continuous continuous both continuous values categorical categorical continuous categorical one more in fact no I think yeah that's all three let me clearly write this categorical continuous right now multivariate will be also these three but again there can be now a third variable would also come so there would be you need to choose depending upon the number of variables right if there are four variables and you want to plot all of them so 4c1 plus 4c2 plus 4c3 plus 4c4 these can be the or one and two are already done so 4c3 plus 4c4 right similarly if there are five variables then 5c3 5c4 5c5 right they can any number of combinations depending upon the number of variables right depending upon n cool any questions in this any doubts anyone any questions okay yeah so this is kind of the breakdown of how you kind of choose the right plot you can again read it we already discussed this now we'll start with the univariate data visualization starting with the categorical data okay let me quickly open the data frame again here data.head yeah so let's say I want to look at the distribution or the number or the frequency or the count of genre right so what am I doing I'm taking the value counts of each genre so it tells me that action like the what is the count for action like what is this count for sports what is the count for miscellaneous so different kind of category or different kind of genres I can I'm kind of looking at the count of this value now looking at this data can you tell me what type of plot can I what kind of charge can upload here histogram okay is histogram cut by the way direct plot histogram here can I plot histogram histogram is still continuous values here I have category value no sports this is the case of categories so histogram is not the answer somebody said bar bar is the answer so I can plot bar with my categories or the genre of the x axis and the frequency on the y axis this is also known as count plot right you're telling the count of each category so bar chat or count plot one in the same thing bar chat is something very general I can plot multiple values a different type of values on y axis but for count plot is general like the category and the count of it so yeah you can use the mat plot lip like this so how do you create the x bar first you tell it I've done this right so this is cat counts the count of the categories so now you see it's a data frame or other a series where your index represents your genre and your count value represents your actual count so on the x axis what do I want to plot on the x axis what would come genre of the count genre so how do I get the genre I can do dot index right it tells me all the genre so x bar represents like my x axis represents cat counts dot index and cat count is simply nothing but this was count values so y axis I can simply say cat counts and the syntax is pretty simple PLT dot bar the name of the function is bar right then you pass the x value and then you pass the y value right so clearly we can see as a one thing you notice the values are overlapping right here at the bottom the values are overlapping that doesn't seem pretty at all like I cannot infer what type of categories are what genre are there so I can kind of fix this by increasing the size so how can we handle the overlapping labels either we could decrease the font size but if I decrease the font size it will be too small but that's a possible option or I can increase the figure size I can make it bigger like bring this up till the end of this area so that it's easier to see or I can rotate the labels right right now there are horizontal I can do at a 45 degree I can do at a 90 degree so how we can do that so first things first I am in trying to increase the size so I am using a function called PLT dot figure and passing it a variable called fix size this tells me that what will be the size of the figure so I am giving value 12 comma 8 and then I am again plotting the chart using PLT dot bar now if you see the labels are pretty clear yes or no now there is an overlap I can see exactly what each genre is and what are their counts any questions in this works any doubts any questions any doubts cool now next thing as how we can rotate the labels so for that I am using a different function called PLT dot x sticks x sticks has various type of values that I can use one is parametrile rotation this tells x sticks means how can I update or I can how can I order or I can modify the x values x labels x sticks the labels of the x axis one is rotation rotation tells me how by what degree or what by what angle I can rotate the labels what what will happen if I rotate by 90 degree this will kind of become vertical so you see this becomes vertical action sports so this becomes vertical phone size if I want to reduce the phone size increase the phone size pretty a straight forward right nothing complex in this pretty straightforward variable parameter you just read and you get to know what is it what each would of each of it would mean you can anyways go to the matvalip documentation to read about PLT dot bar matvalip or any chart you can go to this documentation and read what different type of values are and what does each of them mean right so this is the documentation any questions folks any questions anyone cool uh okay one more modification of styling I can do is I can change the width of the bar there's a parameter that I am using called width so 0.2 means 20 percent of the actual size so now you see the width has kind of also reduced earlier it was more thicker now this has become kind of more thin so you can style by or modify the chart using the widths parameter as well now I'm not going into too much detail because straight forward it's just the parameter and pretty intuitive what each of it means documentation is a source of reading the definition like what is bottom do what is width do I do so pretty straight forward cool how what else or what other type of stylization stylization I can do I can add the title I'm going to give you the title this will give me the title of the chart games per genre so you see now games per genre kind of appear on top earlier it was not there so I can add title I can add the x label using plt. you know x label now x shows genre similarly while able shows count phone size whatever phone you want to size you want to give rotation again very straight forward just code any thousand questions no concept as such syntax any questions anyone cool so this is the bar chart now I'll kind of jump to the next I'll take one more thing I in C ball there's no plot there's another plot called count plot so there you can simply just give the sns dot count plot x let me put the data right so this is the data that I'm passing so data is equal to data on x axis which value do I want to plot I want to plot genre so x will be the name of the column order by which order do I want to kind of plot the data by so in descending order in a sending order by the value counts and color is I can you know kind of pass the color and again rotation things like that so you see the same chart I get but with different formatting using cbon dot count plot count plot is equivalent to the bar plot that we just plotted using mat plot. Any questions in this folks any doubts so this is pure code there's no concept as such concepts we have discussed about various kind of plots so it says how you can execute in python that's all ha so now comes a more interesting part the inference what can you infer from the start folks what what is the inference that we can do what do you infer from this and what will you advise to just by this start what will you tell the company about the type of games that they should make right so basically this tells me the frequency of different type of genres that occur in my data so this tells me that actions sports action and sports are the top two categories that people are kind of as I said so if you want you can start producing game he's genre what what mis miscellaneous tell me what does miscellaneous tell me miscellaneous any category yeah intuitive so right you're right that it's just that they occur more in your data it could be the case that action game that will produce since the beginning of the time and these are these are recent additions that's where the frequency is low you can say that but for simplicity see if you just have this information what can you infer and what can you kind of suggest just for simplicity six definitely you can count for more variables and the nuances can be a little more deeper but for simplicity six I'm asking what can you infer from this miscellaneous is something other than these categories right so you can kind of ignore miscellaneous why it's why can I ignore miscellaneous by the way so basically this tells you that anything other than these categories I have printed in one random category right there can be infinite number of games categories right let's say there could be category which has two games it doesn't make sense to keep on expanding the tail so we do it take those kind of category which are very limited count and just put it in one single bin called miscellaneous so that because it doesn't tell me exactly what category miscellaneous is so I can ignore that I can look at action I can look at sports I can look at role playing shooter blah blah blah blah right so from this side I can read I can infer the top I top journal that appear in my dataset by frequency is this clear any questions anyone any doubts cool I think I before I move forward it's 336 let's take a quick 5 minute break and let's come back at 341 and then we can continue with the other charts cool if you want to kind of use the arrest room or go for water you can do that let's take a 5 minute break and if anybody has any questions any doubts they can stay back and ask those out cool everybody can hear me right so start angle equal to 90 will tell me what is the first start today start the angle at the top of it right explode what is explode tell me explode tells me that take out the first category like there are the four values right by four because there are four regions here so 0.2 explode means take out the first category and take it out by 20 percent so here if you look at it of this chart this particular bracket or this particular category is kind of coming out right so this is what explode does 0.2 have passed it 0.2 for the first value and for the others I have kept if I let's say 2.3 here for the third category now you see the third one has also kind of popped out so this explode parameter controls how do how your each of the category move this tells you round off so this is a round enough to two decimal places so this tells me round off to two decimal places if I do it three now you will have three decimal places 0.3763 if I just do it one so it will give me only the first decimal place rounded off to the first decimal place so this is for rounding off then title title tells you what is the title of the chart and PLD or show actually it is good for plot cool so from what what I can infer from this tag folks what is the information that I am getting from this tag sorry okay they agreed but what do you infer like what can you infer from this tag what is your insight yes so I can say that North America is a bigger market for me as compared to the rest of the world all you can say that these three regions are not America Europe and Japan 32 plus 23 that is 55 55 plus another 30 so these three region alone can 15 85 percent of my sales 85 percent of the sales are coming from just three regions so what would your advice 10 cent what would you tell them 85 percent of the sales are coming from three regions what would you tell them and send is paying you by the hour for your insight tell me focus only on these okay any other inside any other that can be another point of view so the first thing that you are going to ask 10 cent what is your goal do you want to kind of increase the profit on clear your sales what do you want to expand your market so to answer that question is increase the sales then the first answer was correct that focus more on your these regions because these are the main drivers of your sales but if the answer to your question is the second one that I want to expand the market and the second answer was correct that focus more on the other regions so that this five this particular region can you know get expanded so it depends on the business goal of the company is that clear any other questions any other questions any doubts anyone so you should have first clarity of the problem statement what do you actually try to solve cool so this was for your categorical data we show we discussed count plot of bar chart and we discussed pi charts now let's move to numerical data so now what kind of questions we can answer with the help of numerical data like how is the data distributed as I have one to look at the data distribution what type of chart will I use you have one to look at the data distribution is the data skewed are there any outliers another hint histogram right histogram can tell me how is the data distributed is it skewed are there any outliers how many like how much percentage of the data is below or above a certain number achar statistics like min max mean median which plot will tell me this min max median which plot will tell me this is there a plot we started just now box plot box plot gives you the five numbers summary which are subset of these cool let's say we want to find the distribution of the games released every year right so I can use a histogram for that with the exploring only the year column so this is what I get but I do PLT dot hist again syntax is very straightforward it is name the function and just pass in the variable PLT dot hist tells you histogram and this is the column that you want to explore here right so what can you infer from this so you can say that majority of the games were kind of produced or created in this region like the centralish kind of region take majority of the games were produced as per the data in this kind of region right achar what's the skewness of this left skewed right so the tail is on the left side so it's a left skewed right so I can simply answer that I have significant amount of my data from this time P right any questions any doubts achar what is what are these what is this a bar coil like what is the bar that you kind of see what is this coil in a histogram yeah bins these are bins right this is something that is customizable I can alter the number of bins by default histogram PLT up map log lives histogram has 10 bins by default but you can change that right we'll see yeah so these are the inside the skewed with a lot more games between this period full now coming to the bins right did the phone number is 10 but we have 40 years of data I can do that in four bins as well right I can pass bins as four then we'll create just four bins right you see first second third and four if I if I have 40 years of data how much and I divide into four bins each bin will have how many years of data if I've got 40 years of data and I'm dividing into four equal bins each bin will have how many years of data 10 years 40 divided by four so each of the bin will have 10 years of data first bin has 1980 to 1990 then 1991 was 22 2000 2002 2010 and 2010 to 2020 right so that means that in the year 2000 to 2010 more sub 20 years was produced in the year 2000 to 2010 why why do you think so so in the 2000s the dot com bubble or the dot com boost came right websites start internet came in so there was there could be a reason it could be a reason because of internet came so many games started to kind of improduce sorry the lesser the bins are the lesser the information let me think in a way I mean if I just reduce it to one bin it will be just one big child then I'm not I will not be able to infer anything right let's say if I do this right now I cannot infer anything from it right just one single bin so in a way you can say or you can say as you kind of reduce the bin you get more higher level of information higher level not very nuanced not very details as you kind of kind of start increasing the bins will see more more and more information but again that is also diminishing return you will start seeing information up till certain number of bins but then again it will start coming down for example if I let's say divided into so it takes so much time well let me shorten it let me divide into 10,000 bins still take some time let's do a little let's do 100 see now can you infer anything from this can you infer everything from this this is effectively reduced to each single year bar chart data for 256 and so on so forth so alternatively I can also not say that if you keep on increasing the bins you will see more information usually you will see information up till a certain point and then the returns will start to kind of diminish or the information that you can see will start to diminish so yes lower the number of bins more high level information but not necessarily more bins means more information that is also not true is that clear any other questions anyone full huh so one more thing I can actually get the specific bins the data for specific bins as well again pass count bins and rest of the information I can just leave it empty now if I do this now you look at the bins by default we have 10 bins right so the first bin is 1980 to 1984 1984 onwards 1988 onwards so you have 10 bins 1980 silicate 2020 so you can actually get the bins and the count count tells me what is the number of data points in each bin so for 1980 I have 112 games for 1984 there was a 70 to 70 games 1988 92 games so and so forth so for each bin each four year period how many data points do I have right for 1980 I guess I'm 12 84 70 so each bin and the count of data points in each of those bins is that clear very simple code just pass in the count and bins as variables and just use the PLD or his function any doubts anyone any questions cool so again very straightforward syntax only what does these count and bins mean explanation is there you can read when you kind of revise so if you want to plot an histogram using seabon you can just do sns dot his plot his plot in the functioning for histogram and seabon just passing the variable and the number of bins you want to give so this is more much more detailed I mean different style that's all more not the details but the style is different that's all so boundaries are more defined x and y's are labeled automatically by default you get the label using seabon next is kernel density estimation does anybody know what kernel destiny estimation means KDE plot what does KDE mean anyone has any idea what does kernel density density estimate any idea even that's that does anybody know what problem PTF everybody knows right right so KDE or kernel density estimation is a method to estimate the probability density of the given data so you can you're you'll you'll you'll get always have a sample of the data from the sample inferring that probability density is not easy so you have certain models so kernel density estimation is a method you can use to estimate the probability density of that particular data and KDE plot actually plots that so this is this is available in seabon so you can do sns dot KDE plot data here so notice that on the y axis now you don't have the frequency you have the probability density estimated probability density you'll end the KDE method and on the x axis you have your year so if you want to kind of look at them side by side so this is the KDE plot this is your histogram you notice one thing histogram is kind of telling you the frequency right the count and KDE plot is telling you the density or the probability density like for example if I have to say if I have to find out what is the probability of my data lying between 2000 to 2010 it will be the area under this curve I hope we have studied PDFs and PDM like PMPMFs in the previous classes so this is the probability density curve and this is the frequency or the counts or histogram and KDE is basically method KDE is a model to estimate the probability density right it's a mathematical model we will not go into the details I have linked the source have linked some reading material you can go to these like I watch this youtube video or go to a Wikipedia page to kind of read more about what is kernel density estimation but KDE plot again at a high level gives you plot probability density for this particular variable any questions anyone so where do I mean how can I use probability density estimation why do I need to plot it why am I plotting a PDF curve so let's say this is a PDF or probability density why am I plotting this curve can anyone think like why do I need a probability density in general what information does it give me how can my business benefit from this sorry what what will I do after seeing think I money it's normal it's normal distribution then what so what do I do how is my business how is it helping me bring money to my bank account why do you do business because we want to make money right so how does my wireless studying probability density how do it help me make money of what good okay you are on the right track so basically it tells me the chances of certain events happening right so let's say I am I am into a business of car cleaning right or right car servicing right and on this is basically represents the number of cars coming at time t let's say this is 9am this is 10am so on so forth basically time in hours so I can use the probability density estimation curve to identify the probability right I can say estimate the chances of X number of cars coming to me coming to my service between 9 to 10am so if this if the number is high let's say I can expect more than 15 cars between 9 to 10 I can plan my resources accordingly I can have more number of people if I have basically high number of cars between this period the probability is also high so I can you know plan my resources accordingly I can have more number of people at this point in time I can have my you know products ready I can check my if things are available with me or not so this will ensure that my operations or my operation at peak hours are kind of not broken so with these probability density estimation curves I can figure out how can I plan my work better is that clear is that clear to everyone any dow is any confusion so these are very fundamental things folks nobody will ask you what is a KD plot they will ask you why do I need a KD plot how will my business go with it so it's important to understand the purpose you can read more about the mathematical model like the mathematical approach to estimate the probability density using KD there's an explanatory video also cool coming to the box plot this is the five number summary so yeah details about what is the minimum value what is a lower quota, medium again definitions are there I've left it for you to read so I can I'll quickly show you how to implement a box plot using C-BON so here we are kind of plotting the box plot for the global sales first I'm creating a figure giving it a fixed size so 15 gometan is bigger bigger plot box plot tells me that I want to plot a box plot what is the y-axis basically I want to plot global sales what is the phone size of my y-labeles what is the label name of my actually y-axis phone size for that and the title of my chart so this basically charge shows me what does it show me global sales of video games global sales of video games in million dollars titles so and so forth so from this what I can infer can you look at the chart and tell me the skewness what type of skewness is there left skewed okay by left skewed mm-mm anyone else yeah sorry come again be a little loud I can do you I'm asking it's a left stutter right stutter left so does that mean it's left or right if most of the values are coming on the left then is it left or right the graph will be more on the left side then it will be right skewed or left skewed see what are outliers outliers are points that occur very few right two-fue and frequency if I try to plot the histogram for this you see most of the values are actually lying on the left part of the graph these are the outliers so they are two-fue and frequency this is something how the histogram aspect would look like so it's not left skewed is actually right skewed if you plot the histogram is it clear so this is how you are key D chart or histogram will kind of look like any of the questions anyone so these dot represents outliers this is the max value this is the third quartile Q3 this is the median value Q2 this is the first quartile Q1 and this is the minimum value any question anyone cool so this was around the univariate data analysis Ajahn questions for you for analyzing marks given by an attack company scalar we want to find the range in which the most number of students are scored which will be the best suited plot for this tell me your answers which type of plot should I use for this use case I want to find the range for which most of the number of students have scored histogram because I tell you the range so the answer to this is histogram is it clear to everyone why is it histogram because histogram out of these plots histogram tells me the range anybody any questions does it make sense anybody any questions the telecom company atl once you find out customers across different payment modes opted by the customer which will be the best suited plot for this pi okay anyone else sorry count why pi and why count okay what about you but the question does not ask a percentage questions asking for count so count will be the answer because we want to find the count of customer the number of customers are got different payment modes right what can be different payment modes UPI credit card debit card others a cash others and I simply want to find the count of the customers count I can plot the count plot no I had the question ask proportion or percentage then yes pi chart could have been the answer UPI CC debit card others if you want to represent the percentage the proportion then pi chart would have been answered is it clear any doubts anyone doesn't make sense why count plot and why not pi chart run here the chart any doubts anyone on the right side clear to everyone in the state of hariana we want to find the proportion of people who smoke which will be the best suited plot for this and I would like anyone from the right to answer what will the type of the plot billet loud anyone so the question is asking the proportion of people who smoke so we discuss right if you want just now we discuss if you want to display the proportion then pi chart is the chart to go for so pi chart is used for displaying the proportions so the answer will be pi chart if you click on the details you will see the explanation of the questions in the answers so you can read the detailed explanation also cool so these were the questions that I had we have some time left and I have one more notebook to cover but any questions on this any questions anyone any doubts any doubts cool so let us also look at buy variant analysis let me share this notebook as well so this is the second notebook this contains material on buy variant analysis so this will discover buy variant data visualization continuous combination categorical categorical and categorical continuous and then plotting multiple charts in one that also shows this will first step importing the data again we using the same data but now we will try to analyze multiple variables together so first thing is continuous continuous what are the continuous variables here what are the continuous variables sorry what are the various continuous columns here is the same graph sorry same table the sales columns basically are the continuous variables now continuous continuous so basically on my x axis also continuous variable and on the y axis also the continuous variables so what type of a chart should I use if I want to show relation between two variable features like how does the sales vary over the years how our features associated positively and negatively what type of chart can I use how does the sales vary over the years when we started our class we discussed sales varying by another continuous variable like temperature so what type of chart did we use then I scream sales versus temperature sorry one type of chart so I can use a scatter plot no folks scatter plot is a line plot so line plot is pretty straightforward I will show you the scatter plot which is mean third again let's start with scatter plot so there is a lot of content within so line plot is one so I can plot the sales trend over the years that is on my x axis on my x axis I can plot year and on my y axis I can plot sales sales data so for the year 1985 for the year 2000 for the year 2010 2020 so on so forth how does my sale move right this is our line chart or sales trend chart I can plot so you see what is the first step that I am doing I am grouping by I am trying to answer this question how can we plot the sales trend over the years for the longest running game so I am finding the longest running game so first things I am first grouping by the name let's look at step by step then I am aggregating finding the minimum year the minimum value let's look at this so basically this tells me the starting year of the game and the maximum we have the ending year of the game now tell me if I want to find the longest running game the game that has been running for the longest time how can I find it if I want to find the game which has been running for most of the years how will you find that you have the max year you have the min year how can I find the number of years it has run for if the game started in 1980 and it ended in 2010 after this the sales stopped how many years did it lasted for how many years it lasted for how did you calculate it start year or the min year and the max year no so you did max minus min and you found the number of years it ran for or the range so you have the max value you have the min value you just need to subtract them so here we are first finding the game life group by the name and finding the minimum year and finding the maximum year like this and then I want to create a variable called range so I simply do max minus min yes or no so now you see I have a range column that's all then I am using sort values to kind of sort it and finding the top five games that have lost lasted the long so Isocki is the category Isocki is the name that is you know has been running for the most of the years so the question was sales trend over the years for the longest running game so we have identified the longest running game is actually Isocki so now we need to plot the sales for or North American sales for Isocki so first filter on Isocki so first I am filtering on Isocki so name equal to equal to Isocki and then I am using C bond to plot the line plot on x axis I am going to plot here y axis my North American sales and data is this filter data what does this tell me what does this tell me about the North American sales for Isocki so what does this tell me what does what information does this give anyone so basically this tells me that between 1990 till 2005 my sales were increasing so maybe this game was popular between 1990 till 2005 post that people are not kind of interested in that so that is why the sales have started to go down right the sales across North America seemed to have been boosted in the years 90 and divided with one five post 110 the sales seemed to have taken a different right so this is what you can infer from this chart now styling and labeling you can give the x label while able right another important color of course whatever color you want to give red another important thing that I want to discuss is plotting multiple line charts so in the same graph I can compare two different sales here I have created the sales for baseball in the previous case I calculated for Isocki or a loggy now I want to plot the same chart on the same chart so I can use two line plot functions one for i h or Isocki and the another for baseball and you see that this comes on the same chart which one is isocki and which one is baseball which one is isocki and which one is baseball can you tell from just by looking at it we cannot right so we need some information that tells me which line represents mid chart so I have a parameter called label right when you put the label so C-bone automatically starts showing it so blue line is actually isocki and the orange one is baseball so that's how you can plot multiple you know values on the same chart you can plot more three four five how many you want you can plot on the same chart cool alternatively you can use the function called PLD or legend and pass the order like the first one is isocki and second one is baseball so you can do that using PLD or legend as well so that's an alternative method cool again the rest of the code is telling you the positioning how do you place it at the bottom at the top or the left right so and so forth just parameters you can read about this and it will be pretty clear the important concept that I want to discuss next is actually scatter plot so let's say now I want to find a relation between rank and sales there's a column called rank and then the sales of the games so our rank and sales positively or negatively correlated if I want to answer this question how can I do that see this is the line plot between rank and global sales it looks pretty messy right it doesn't tell me although it tells me that the graph is going down but it's pretty messy right alternative method could be using the scatter plot this is much more clear so I'm using as an example scatter plot passing the data x variable and y variable x axis the rank y is the global so now here you see actual data points you can see how which data point lies at which position let me plot it here let's compare the two this is scatter plot this is the same line plot did you notice the difference this the plot on the left hand side gives me information at a point by point level so I can know the position of a single data point as well here it is not possible it's connected by a line I don't know if there's 1.2 point 3 points I don't know here if there are 1.2 point 3 point but here I can clearly see if there are single data points right so that's why scatter plot is kind of better in these use cases now tell me is it positively correlated or negatively correlated are the two variables positively correlated or negatively correlated negative by right so it's negatively correlated you know it's going down as your he rank it's not he has rank as your rank is increasing the global sales are kind of going down that means those who are ranked lower are actually having high number of sales while those who are ranked higher are actually having a low number of sales but that is also not true for every every game because see despite having a low rank this has a low sales value so that that tells me that there are other variables other factors involved that determine the rank of the game it's not just the sales sales could be one of the variables is that clear there can be other factors involved because we are seeing low rank games having low sales as well so but at a high level so I infer two things from it this is negatively correlated right second is it's not the only factor it's just one of the contributing factor is that clear any doubts any confusions cool so we're done with like till the continuous plots we have categorical categorical left and continuous categorical left we can take this up in the next class but you have the notebook it's pretty straightforward you can read it by yourself as well but we'll take it up in the next class any questions anyone any doubts cool if no doubts we can break now I would need someone to kind of take the attendance can anyone please come and take the photos while I launch the assignments yeah please take this switch on the lights anything yeah any questions yeah we can go and just let me quickly launch the cool folks assignments have been unlocked you can start looking into those while your TA comes