you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you the the But tell me what was the OS? Manjus hardware devices, what else? What else? Memory management? These are the functions of OS. What is OS? Correct? So we can say the OS is like a user interface that we have between the user and the program and the hardware. And a lot of the functions that you guys told come under resource management. So I can say that OS is not just a user interface rather it is also a resource manager. What is? What is another one of very important tasks of OS that we have? Whatever we are running something, OS ensures that it is smoothly executed. Thank you. It is not visible. Why? In the meantime. Is it visible now? What was being shown earlier? Okay. So we were saying that OS is going to ensure that whatever programs are running in your computer are all running smoothly. Okay. But these three things were the major task of OS and we can say this exactly is OS. It's a software which acts as a user interface. It is going to be our resource manager. It is going to ensure that everything runs smoothly on your computer. Is that clear? Yes or no? Okay. So now we'll have a couple of quizzes. Okay. This is going to be a very simple quiz. It is about what is an OS. We'll have 45 seconds to answer this. All the best. Please answer. Thank you. Thank you. 90% correct answers. Very good. Everyone. So we were able to notice over here that even when I run the simplest of programs and I want to allocate memory. Okay. I want to manage CPU and handle the output. OS is going to be the one which does all these tasks. Yes. Okay. Moving on to another question. Now we'll have only 30 seconds. Okay. This is about the relationship between a program OS and the hardware. Okay. Okay. 87% correct answers. So again, if I talk about any user program, it can be anything, whatever a user wrote or a system program or any application. You will have the program and this program is going to interact with the OS and then the OS interacts with the hardware to actually get the job done. There is no way that your program can directly interact with the hardware we have seen this. We had the analogy that the user program is like a customer who is ordering at the kitchen or the restaurant hardware is the restaurant which is actually going to provide you the food. But there is no way that the person themselves can go to the kitchen directly and get the food from there. There has to be a mediator that is the waiter and here the mediator is the OS. Okay. So this is the relationship. Okay. Another question. Okay. Okay. Okay. Very good. 96% correct answers. So obviously the program cannot directly access the hardware because we have seen that OS ensure that all the programs whatever are running are isolated in nature. Which means that they have a separate memory. No other program can interact with their memory. Secondly, we can ensure that one process is running in the CPU at one time. This ensures that every single app is protected. There is no unauthorized access happening. If you let all the users directly handle OS, we do not know which user is actually accessing what kind of information and they can be a breach of data. Okay. That was the major reason why OS handles everything and cannot directly let anything else handle screen and disk. Also, we have seen that whenever we have external devices external devices are going to be very, very complex. So the user directly handles all these devices. It is going to indulge in the complexities instead of actually working on the job. Next quiz please answer. This is about system calls. Very good 98% correct answers. So the instructions are the programs. The instructions are the programs and whatever requests the program makes to the OS are known as system calls. We have seen this and we can write any command but that command itself does not execute rather. There is a system call in the background which interacts with the operating system and then the operating system is going to perform its task on the hardware. Last revision quiz. So we need 4% correct answers. I was hoping a lot more. So anyways, whatever instruction that you write in a program, not everything is a system call. Like if I write the fall loop, I like if condition, the break statement, all these are not system calls. So these are simple program instructions that we have. Simple program instructions. Nothing else. But if we make an actual request to assign memory. Now when I am saying assign memory, I am trying to interact with the hardware which I can't do directly and that is how the OS gets involved. So right now an actual request to the OS is made and that request is to assign memory which is new in 100. Similarly, I can try to access the external hardware devices like the output screen. So if I write SOP and then print anything on the screen, I am trying to access an external device which means this is the job of the OS and this is also a print system call. Is this clear everyone? This is the very basics of what we have done in the previous class, all the functions which the OS has and what our system calls exactly. Now we will move on to today's class and we learn in detail about what our processes. Because I am not assigning value at the moment, if I would have said define a variable which means I actually go ahead and put a value in the variable then it is the spaces created. So it is again like a system if I declare a simple variable like this technically what happens a memory is allocated with the garbage value. But it is not actually saying to assign me a block of memory that is why a simple request if I would have said that define a variable put a value over there then I could consider this a system call that is all. Although I do understand where the doubt comes from that whenever I declare a variable technically a memory is created. So moving on we have seen that how the OS allows multiple programs to run at a time. And when we have a computer running they are definitely a number of programs not just the ones that we have written but also what the computer has. So my question to you is have you ever wondered how your laptop or your computer runs so many apps at the same time. Like right now what all things are running on your laptop. You are multitasking. What else can I say you have chrome open definitely right now tell me is chrome right here a single application yes but is it a single program by itself. By the way we have discussed stack memory and heap memory right we have discussed right so if I give you a better example of this. The memory that we have is divided into stack and heap whenever a program is running or a function is running everything gets assigned in the stack so technically you're not trying to interact with the heap memory. So if you declare the variable the variable declaration is done over here simple variable declaration but if you would have given an address or any location or a pointer type variable then it would go to the heap then you require OS interaction I forgot that we have done stack and here is this clear. So we are going on discussing that chrome itself might seem like one app but is it a single program no they can be multiple tabs open they can be multiple tabs open and all these tabs are actually nothing but a new process. You might have terminal open you might have VS code open you might have Spotify open so every single one of them is running together on your computer so how does it exactly work how does is exactly work. Think about it if I ask you a question does your computer does your computer have multiple CPUs for each app. Yes or no we do not have multiple CPUs we have something known as course which we will discuss in detail but even if we have multiple course are we going to assign one single code to every single program that we have no that is not possible. Like in general you must have heard about octa core octa core means we have eight course so it's good if I am running eight apps eight apps can run on one single core at a time but if I have 20 apps open if I have 30 apps open which is actually possible because one task can create multiple other tasks so at that moment will I have 80 or 90 number of CPUs as course no we are not going to get it. And if we are saying that we don't exactly have multiple CPUs rather we are running everything on the same CPU then how does how does the CPU switch between these apps which are running on it. Again a brief of this was covered in the previous class that it does switch between the applications but how does it exactly do that. The next question we should pop into your head is how does it remember how does it remember where each app stopped. Now I believe every single one of you owns mobile phones right and if you open multiple tasks in it and don't terminate the task don't end the task open what's up and simply push it to the background open Instagram puts it to the background so now when you reopen the app does your app restart. No, it does not restart rather it resumes similarly if you are running a game and you want to pause the game because you have got a call maybe isn't this call like an IO interrupt. I was running a game the game is a program I got a call now call was the IO interrupt because it is coming from outside it is an IO interrupt. Now I would pick the call the game is on pause so when I open the game app again am I supposed to restart the game altogether not really I am able to resume it so how does my OS remember that where exactly did my app stop. That is another question that should come to your mind and today's class we will be answering these three questions we understand how the OS manages multiple tasks. We will be discussing about processes how does it switch between apps this is context switching and what kind of smart memory techniques does it use such that it remembers where each app has stopped. Is this clear everyone any doubt at the moment. Have I shared the link of the notes. No right. I will share it in a bit. Now if I ask you what is a process what will be around so what is a process. We definitely know what is a program program is nothing but a set of instructions what is a process. I can say that whenever we have a process it is not something completely different from a program rather when you click run on your program when you click run or your program your program becomes a process. So this program was nothing but some text yes we have seen that even if I wrote the most immaculate code and I don't run it it is nothing no memories allocated it cannot run right also I cannot even see any error which I have written. I don't know what are the errors in my program. Only when I run it I can see the errors also. So any code is static in nature and that code is a program and the moment I click the run button or I give the run command it turns into a process. A process is nothing but a program is execution or a running program and this is going to be dynamic in nature. Is that clear? Yes they want to share a right. So when we took the example of Chrome and said that Chrome is a program or an app it is not one single one because it has multiple things running on the side as well. Is that clear? Yes any doubt as of now. Moving on we were seeing that your CPU runs the programs. Now the reality is that a CPU can run only one program at a time. A CPU can run only one program at a time. So suppose this is a CPU. Suppose this is a CPU. Now what does the internal structure of a CPU look like? You will have a set of registers. Do you all know what registers are? Tell me what are registers? It is a smallest memory unit very good everywhere. It is a smallest memory unit and it is very fast. Now tell me smallest I get it but why is it so fast? Absolutely right. Because this register is directly connected to the ALU where all the operations exactly happen and that is why it is super fast. So this thing that you have right here. This setup of registers. And ALU is known as the core of the CPU. A core of the CPU. And this core is in turn connected to the rest of the system. Anything that is available in the system like the IO devices or anything. Do you all know what is a bus? Bus is like a link between hardware link between any single component of the computer. So this is a CPU and the CPU has a core. So at that time only one program can run inside this core. At the moment all the registers will be dedicated to that one single program. All the ALU strength will be dedicated to that one single program. Only when I go ahead and say that I have one CPU but that one CPU has multiple codes. In that case what happens? This is the scenario. Okay. This is core one. And this is core two. Now you have the same CPU system which means that this is the system bus. And you connected to the rest of the computer. But now the cores are also connected to the rest of the computer. Are you able to spot the difference? Right here it's a single core CPU here itself dual core CPU. Okay. Now these cores are like independent processing units inside the CPU. Okay. You can think of it like a worker inside the CPU. Can a worker do multiple tasks at the same time? Not exactly. It is going to do only one task at a time. Like I say that you are solving three assignments simultaneously. So are you using all your hands and doing three assignments at the moment? No. What do you do instead? You try to work on assignment one. You do some of the tasks and then you say that maybe that the question is a little difficult or maybe I want to finish the other assignment as well. So I moved to the second assignment. And then I moved to the third assignment. So can I say the person who's doing the job is only one which is you. But you are doing multiple tasks. Are you doing all the same tasks at the same time? No. You are doing it. In I can say a parallel mode. Okay. But it is not exactly parallel. It seems parallel. Because you're doing it one after the other, but you're doing it very, very fast. Is that clear? Okay. So we have a small illustration for single core and multi core CPU. So we can say a single core CPU is just one core. Nothing else. Okay. Now it can be very fast. But it is very sad because you're making it do all the jobs. Okay. You have four tasks available. You are opening a browser running VS code, having Spotify open and other tasks also are going on. And this Bichara CPU is doing everything. Okay. Although it is doing it. How it is doing it? You run the task a. Okay. Now when you move to task B, you need to save the information about task a. And switch to task B. Then again, similarly, when you want to run another task because you want to make it look seamless, you are going to run task C. Save the context of task B and switch to task C. Again, when you want to run another task, save the context and switch. Okay. So you see the CPU is switching between the task very, very fast. And it is giving you an illusion that everything is running all together in parallel. Is that clear, everyone? Okay. But now think about it. If one single CPU is running too many tasks. Isn't it going to lag? Isn't it going to lag? And if it tries to finish everything very, very fast, there is only one worker and definitely it is going to lag. And that is why we switch to a better model or better architecture, which has multi code. Okay. So right now you see a quad-core processor. And here the CPU is only one. But inside CPU, you see four different workers. So many workers are doing many jobs at the same time. So I have core one. They are going to run the browser core two running the VS code core three running Spotify core four who is doing other background stuff. And they all come under the same CPU package. Now exactly the task a B C D are actually running in parallel. And that is why it has a much smoother, much faster execution. And we are actually multitasking. But if more than four tasks will come in, they again will line up behind these CPUs. Is that clear, everyone? Any problem at the moment? Okay. So when you want a cheaper software, which does some basic tasks, then you are going to go for a single code. This was available in all the older devices. And now if you try to run a single core CPU, it will feel like a nightmare to you all because it is going to be very, very slow. Now we are multitasking. We are running such heavy apps. Even the games have such heavy graphics. Right. And whenever you are coding also you want the fastest computers possible. And that is why you go for multi core CPUs. Okay. So the essence of it is that single core is one worker which keeps on switching between the task. Multi core is many workers working together. Is this clear, everyone? Any doubt at the moment. Okay. Now tell me why does it feel like everything is running together? Why does it feel like everything is running together? No. Yes. No. Why does it feel like every single task is happening together? In general you use multi core only. Even in a single core also same thing is happening. The same task is happening on single core. Same task is happening on multi core. Multi core is even faster than single core. That is it. Okay. I will announce a quiz now. You see the options you will get the right answer. Beware. That is correct when we think about multi core. But in multi core also I have right now if I have four cores. Okay. But what if I have 10 apps running? Will I have different cores for every single app? Will I have different cores for every single app? Think about it and tell me will I have multiple cores for every single app that I have? I am not going to. Then why is it going to be fast? Think about it and then answer the next question again. I believe when you see the options. Yes. Now you are giving correct answers in the chat. When you see the options it will be even more clear to you that what is the answer. Okay. Okay. Okay. So we are saying that your laptop is running everything. Okay. At the same time. But it is not exactly running in parallel. It seems like it is running in parallel. Okay. Answer the next quiz also and then we will come to the discussion of these answers. Okay. Please answer the next quiz. You have 45 seconds. Okay. Come on everyone should participate. 88% correct answers. Great everyone. So now coming to the questions that we have. So how does your laptop run multiple things? First of all, my mind might go to that a CPU has multi core and because it has multi core, exactly the task can run on multiple CPUs. Now this is not always true. It is only true when you have the exact same number of has. Four cores, four apps, eight cores, eight apps. Then yes, every single program is getting its own CPU and everything is running in parallel. But can that always happen? No, it cannot always happen. Everything seems like it is running in parallel because the operating system switches between the processes very, very fast. Okay. The operating system is going to switch between the processes very, very fast. Okay. Again, suppose I have six tasks available. Okay. So what is happening? P1, P2, P3 is given to different different cores, which is fine. But now do you see even when all the apps have been assigned separate CPUs, there are apps remaining which have not been assigned CPU. Does that mean the apps will always keep on waiting? No, they will always not keep on waiting rather once P1 or P2 or anything finishes the task. P4, P5 will take up the CPU space. Okay. So they will keep on coming to the CPU when it's turn arrives. Okay. Is this clear? CPU is switching between the multiple apps that we have. Any doubts at the moment? Any doubts at the moment? Okay. So CPU is our shared resource. Not every single program can get its own CPU. Okay. Next. Now I am saying that the OS will have a list of applications which keep on running in the process or keep on running in the CPU. Now tell me, how do I decide which program gets to become a process and gets to go into the CPU for execution? How do I decide that? Tell me. We decide this with the help of CPU scheduling. Again, this is a term which I did mention in the previous class. Yes. So what do you think CPU scheduling means? In normal English language, what does scheduling mean? Correct. We are going to plan the sequence of something. Right. Like you have a timetable. This timetable is your schedule. What is shown in this schedule? What happens, which class happens at what time? When does the class end? When does the next class happen? Now imagine that you don't have this timetable with you. Will you know which is the next class? No. Will you know when does the next class start or the current class stops? No. I will not know anything. Same thing happens in the CPU also. If you do not have a proper schedule, you will not know when a process is starting, when the process is ending. What is the next process which you will be running? So CPU scheduling that you have, CPU scheduling is the method used by the operating system to select one process from the ready queue. To execute in the CPU. Now, who exactly does this? There is a part of OS and this part of OS will obviously be nothing but a software. And this software is known as the scheduler. A part of the OS is scheduler and this scheduler runs the CPU scheduling algorithms. What is the job? That they will be multiple processes waiting in the queue like this. And you will have the CPU. Now as we know at a time only one process can enter. So the scheduler gets to decide the scheduler gets to decide which process has to be picked. It can be any process. And there are multiple algorithms with the help of which we can decide which process is entering the CPU well. Suppose scheduler says pick P1, P1 goes to CPU executes. Now scheduler says pick P4 as the P1 completes or the P1 is terminated, P4 is picked and put in the CPU. Then again, as P4 completes, again, scheduler can pick whatever process is the next one. This is a job of scheduler and this process is known as CPU scheduling. Now, what do you think CPU scheduling is helping you with? Correct, correct answers. Basically, very good. The first thing is that it is allowing you to multitask. Yes? Because right now we have one single CPU. But technically we have multiple course. So if multiple course are being provided with task to do every moment, I am doing multitasking with the help of scheduler. If scheduler is not there, I do not know which task will be picked up to go into the CPU. Don't you feel like sometimes the CPU might sit idle because it does not know which process it has to execute. What is helping you when multitasking and it ensures that you have efficient CPU utilization. And definitely it is picking the execution order also. It is picking the execution order of the processes. And it is entire aim is that my CPU is never empty. It is doing as much as multitasking is as possible. It is aiming to reduce the wait time. It is aiming to reduce the wait time of the programs or the processes. Because I see that everything is standing in a queue. If you are in a queue, you are waiting. And if you are not picked at the correct time, I can say that your wait time will increase and increase and you will eventually starve. And you will never be given the exact resources. And this in turn improves the overall performance of your CPU. This is all what is handled or done by the CPU scheduling. Is it clear everyone? Is it clear? We will have a small question again. Just to check how many of you understood what is CPU scheduling. Again OS will allocate memory. The scheduler is not going to allocate memory. The scheduler is not doing anything. The scheduler is just arranging everything in the sequence of execution that you want to happen. Please answer the next question. Thank you. I will show you that next. The basic task scheduler is that it just picks what is the next task which you are going to run. So the scheduler itself is providing you with a sequence. Which means that it is internally maintaining which process has to come next. Now as we are saying that the processes enter the CPU and complete its life cycle. It is execution. So tell me if the OS is running a process. Does OS run one process forever? Imagine I have P1, P2, P3, P4. P1 takes 10 seconds. P2 takes 2 seconds. P3 takes 1000 seconds. P4 takes 20 seconds. Now tell me. If I have one single CPU and I am saying the scheduler right now says this is the scheduler. The scheduler is pointing to P1. That now P1 should execute. So P1 goes in the CPU, completes its execution and terminates. It terminates. Now as CPU was empty, my scheduler knows very well that even before my CPU is empty, the scheduler will point to the other process which is wants to go in the CPU. So now scheduler is saying pick P2. If P2 is picked, P2 goes into the CPU and performs its execution. This is also complete. Now scheduler is pointing to P3. Now how much time is P3 taking? 1000 seconds. Now only feel like 1000 seconds is a lot. It is actually a value in minutes but even more. Now tell me, are you willing to wait for one single process to get completed in 1000 seconds so that you can move to the next process? No, you are not. Why? Because you will feel like your system is lagging. Some program has crashed. And the moment we see a program crashing, what do we do? We open the system and try quitting all the apps. We open the app manager and try quitting all the apps. Why are we doing that? Technically the process is running only and the moment P3 will complete, P4 will execute. So right now if the OS is allowing one process to wait for its entire execution, is this a very good idea? No, it is not a very good idea. Two reasons. First of all, your CPU is being hogged by one single process. The user will feel like the process is very very slow. There is something wrong with my computer. Secondly, all the other processes which are below this are in a waiting state. Now when a process is continuously in a waiting state, eventually it will die out of starvation. We will see that in the later classes, but if any process is waiting too much, it is going to die out of starvation. And we would never want that. What if this P4 is a very crucial thing to do? Maybe P4 was an external request. And the external request has to wait so much before it gets to execution. But definitely this is not a very fair idea. This is definitely not working. This is definitely not working. So what does the OS do instead? What the OS does is that instead of allowing every single program to run for its complete execution, it is going to give you time slots. It is going to give you time slots and these time slots are known as time slice or quantum. What does this mean? That now the process is not going to wait for its entire execution rather it will run for a quantum of time. Which means now if the CPU says that every process whichever comes in me can run for five seconds. So now what happens if the scheduler now picks P1, P1 will go and execute and it will execute for how much time? Only five seconds. So now five seconds will be removed from here and the total remaining time is going to be five seconds. And this P1 is removed. Next, scheduler again picks another one. Suppose right now scheduler picks P4. P4 goes in the CPU executes. It takes five seconds. How much is remaining? 15 seconds. Now the scheduler picks P2 as it picks P2, P2 executes and the remaining time is 0. Now it picks P3. It picks P3 and P3 executes and there is the remaining time. You see how every process has not now got a chance to run in the CPU. And now when after running so many apps or after running so many programs scheduler can again pick whatever app it wants to. Suppose it picks the process one again. Now when the process one executes, you can say that none the process one will be completed. This will be completed. This is also completed and now the scheduler will pick between this and this. Is this clear? So see how the CPU is now being used fairly. Every single program or every single process that you have gets a chance to go into the CPU. No process is starving. Is this clear? Everyone. Okay. But times lot or the time quantum ensures that the CPU resources are not being hoved. Okay. Now who gets to decide this? It is not exactly fixed. Okay. This time quantum runs between 10 milliseconds to 100 milliseconds. Okay. Now depending on whatever algorithm your OS has picked to schedule all the processes. Depending on what kind of task you are doing, depending on what kind of processor you have. This quantum keeps on varying. Okay. There is no set number for this quantum. Okay. As we'll go in the next class, you will see multiple questions in which we will give you a time quantum for which our process can execute in the CPU. And you will see that how in every single question that time quantum keeps on changing. Okay. So we have a small illustration for time quantum also. Okay. See whenever we are scheduling. There are multiple algorithms to do so. Okay. There are multiple algorithms to do so. Now think about it. Like you said that P1 P2 P3 P4 have all different different times. 10 seconds, 3 seconds, 1000 seconds, 10 seconds again or 20 seconds. Okay. Now tell me, is this process list a stagnant list? Do we get all the processes at the same time and then no process comes in? That is not so. It means that new processes will always keep on adding in this queue. Now if you want to ask the ready queue, ready queue is like the processes are waiting for its execution. And this is never a static queue. It keeps on incrementing. Now if I'm saying that run the processes for the best time, best time means whatever is the shortest should run first correct. Now if I have a CPU over here, the least time is for P2. P2 executes finishes the execution. It is done. Now next shortest time is P1 I'm assuming. Okay. This also executes. Now what if another process comes in and this process is once again. As my schedule is only picking the best process, which process will be picked now? P5. So P5 executes. Now again, P6, P7, P8 come in. They also might have smaller times. Right. So now if I have P6, 2 second complete, P7, 3 second complete, then P4, 10 second complete. So do you see I am never able to reach this P3. Now although it is a big app, but does that mean that it never requires execution? We are always going to put it in the back. No. If we do that, it will also lead to the starvation state. Now we can say that maybe this P3 was in fact a very crucial application which you had to run to run other programs. So because of P3 is blocked, other processes are also blocked. So there is no one single algorithm which is the best. As we move forward to the next class, you will see multiple algorithms like FCFS. FCFS is first come first serve, whichever process is coming in first serve that first. Next we learn about shortest job first, SJF, whatever the shortest job is, pick that. Then we will have priority. At whatever is a more prior task, do that. So depending on what kind of system we are working in, depending on what kind of programs we are having, we are going to choose amongst the algorithms. There is no one single true algorithm. Is this clear? That is why I said the scheduler is the program and chooses from the algorithms that we have. There are a number of algorithms which we will be seeing in the next class. Any other doubt at the moment? Any other doubt? Coming to this time quantum illustration, we just saw that time quantum is a fixed time that the CPU is giving every process to run. When the time slice is up, the CPU will move on to the next process and which is the next process, it has been decided by the scheduler very well. So CPU says, I run processes for each time quantum, time quantum is nothing but a unit. So if I say I have four processes, these four processes are waiting in the ready queue. Should you learn, will pick which process to run and the time quantum decides for how long this runs. So P1 runs two units, P2 runs two units, P3 runs two units, P4 runs two units. These were the burst times. It means that if P4, P1 has run remaining is two units, P2 has run remaining is two units, P3 has run remaining is three units, P4 has run remaining is zero units. So you see how the burst time or the time that the process needs to complete, it is getting updated every time. So even if your process is not finished as soon as the time slice is up, it will go to the back of the ready queue. Is this clear everyone? Any doubt at the moment? Okay. So this thing that you are doing is actually a round robin kind of thing. So the round robin is like complete task, go to the back of the queue, complete task, go to the back of the queue. That is what we are doing. And it makes sure that everything is very simple, everything is very fair and efficient. Okay. Now my question to you is that we are saying that according to the time quantum, the processes are running. But don't you feel like if I keep on sending a process to the CPU, bring it out of the CPU, bring another process into the CPU, this is also an overhead because task is nothing, but it is going to have some memory. And you are continuously reloading the memory, taking it out, reloading the memory, taking it out. Isn't this an additional overhead for you? Yes or no? Is this an additional overhead for you? And that is why if the time quantum is too small, like here it is suppose of only one unit, it is very small. And all the processes are switching too fast even though to you it looks like because all the processes are switching so, so fast, the CPU performance is also increased. It is going to be super quick and my process will execute. But in reality, because of the overhead which has been increasing, a performance actually goes down. Similarly, the time quantum is too large like 100 units. Then I can say this behaves like first come first serve only, that come complete your task and then only. And this makes your system unresponsive. So, the amount of time quantum chosen is also very, very important. Now, think about it. You all have done asymptotic analysis. Yes? In asymptotic analysis, you get the bigot notation. Now, tell me, is the bigot notation always going to give you the correct best algorithm? No, right? It does not always give you the best algorithm. Why is that? Because I can say, if I have smaller inputs, even the algorithm having that particular bigot of time, the time might keep on increasing and only for very large inputs, it becomes stable. And we have seen that there is a threshold value and only and only after this threshold value, your algorithm is the best one out there. This we have seen, right? Similarly, for the time quantum also, if we decide between something too small and too large, it is not going to give you the optimized performance. So, it is very crucial that you know what is the correct time quantum, which you should choose. For processes having smaller time or smaller burst time, you can go ahead and choose a small time quantum. Whereas, for processes which have a larger burst time, like 100, 200, 300 for such apps or for such programs, you are not going to choose a small time quantum. You will choose something bigger, like maybe 50 units. Is that clear everyone? And when I'm saying you, it means the OS, okay, OS decides it. Any doubt at the moment? Any doubt? Think about it. If you have any questions. Okay. So, fast switching of this app with the help of time quantum is giving you the illusion of parallel execution. Okay. So, now you must also be able to notice that every single process that you have is not always in the running state. Any single process is not always in the ready state also. Okay. So, any single process that I am going to have, wait a minute. Any process that I have will keep on changing its state. Okay. Processes keep changing states. They are not always running. Okay. It's like if the process is inside the CPU, it is in the running state. If the process is waiting for the CPU, it is in the ready state. If an IO interrupt has blocked the process, it is in the waiting state. Okay. So, like this, you have multiple states of a process and your process never remains in one state for too long rather because of the switching which happens over here. Because of this switching, the process will keep changing its state. Okay. So, we will see how the scheduler and the time quantum ensure that the process states keep on changing. So, when again say a process will be in the ready queue the moment you hit run. Okay. Then from the ready queue the scheduler decides which algorithm it has to use and on the basis of that it is picking the algorithm from there. Okay. So, in the ready queue it will go in any order. However, the user is running it. Okay. But from the ready queue how it is picked is defined by the scheduler. Okay. Again, we will learn about more details of CPU should be in the next class. Okay. So, this is CPU scheduling. So, CPU scheduler is like a DJ which is playing multiple songs. Okay. So, the processes are going to be the party guests who have to be pleased every time which means they are ready. They are new to the club that you have and they have to exit the club happy which means they have to dominate at the end. So, the moment a new process arrives what the OS will do. The OS is going to create a PCB PCB is known as the process control block what is the process control block that it contains all the current information about the process that what is the first instruction I have to run what kind of memory it uses what is the current state of this process. And what is the next process I might want to follow up with. Okay. So, all this information about the new process is stored in the process control block. Okay. Then this new process the moment we hit run enters the ready queue. Okay. And in the ready queue it is waiting for it's turn see how the new process comes to the ready queue. Okay. Everybody in the ready queue is sad because they are just waiting for that on now the scheduler is going to pick whichever process it wants to depending on what algorithm you are implementing. See right now schedule has picked this orange process. So, now this gets allocated the CPU time and it is executing. Now, suppose something comes up maybe there is an interrupt maybe the time quantum is finished or maybe because of any other event what will happen. The process will stop and it will enter the waiting queue. Okay. The process has stopped running and it is entering the waiting queue. Okay. And then again the moment an IO or the event is complete the process will enter the ready queue again maybe there was some preceding process which was not completed and that is why it had to wait. So, this waiting goes to the ready queue again what will be the position in the ready queue will also be decided by the OS. Okay. So, now after waiting for so long the process is back to the ready queue and then from the ready queue again the step two step three will re execute and then once the process is complete it is terminated and finally once it is terminated. The PCB the register of information is also removed is that clear. And this six step process does not mean that it is a linear process it keeps on happening multiple processes will keep on switching between each of these states. So, all the states are that the process is new. It is in the ready queue picked from the ready queue awarded CPU time it might happen that they are blood or they are waiting. They become ready again and then they are terminated and this keeps on going until you reach termination. Okay. But this makes sure that the CPU is always busy every single process is always getting fair time to execute and you see if it seems like everything is running in parallel. Okay. And see again different scheduling algorithms decide who gets to the CPU next again we will discuss more about this algorithms in the next class. Is this clear everything everyone. Okay. So, always constantly moves these processes between the multiple states that we have. Now here in this diagram you have signed something very important and this is known as the process control block. Now we will see the importance of the process control block. Okay. So, we are saying that when the CPU switches from one process to another what all things should it remember. Both of you are correct. Imagine that you are doing a quiz. Okay. And the quiz has 20 questions. So, 20 questions are there. And you are solving every question one by one. Like in the scalar platform once you have MCQ questions do you see that you are not shown that the answer is correct or not. You are just shown that you have attempted the question. Okay. Now suppose I have attempted a question but I want to come back to it. What do you do with that question. You book market. Okay. Why do you book market. Why do you book market. Exactly. Do come back to it. It also ensures that you know exactly where you stopped. Yes. What exactly was the place where you stopped. And is this information in I can say sufficient. You should know what were you doing. What were you doing when you stopped. Yes. Both the things are very important. Right. So whenever the CPU is switching between the multiple tasks which means it is bringing one task into CPU taking it out bringing another task in it should know where exactly I have stopped. And what exactly was I doing when I stopped. Okay. Now how do you think the CPU remembers these two things. How do you think the CPU is going to remember these two points. Exactly. It stores the data somewhere. Okay. Now imagine your friends comes up to you and they start giving you some random gossip. So if you are they are giving you random gossip will you be able to relate what exactly happened. Okay. You will ask he at least give me some context and what is the gossip all about. Right. So what is this context. What is this context. The context is all the information. The context is all the information that you need before understanding the gossip. So really here also the context is all the information that you need to resume a process. Okay. So this is all the information you need to resume a process which means very good device. You will need to know what was the program counter program counter is like pointing to the next instruction that you have to run. What was the memory. What was stored in the memory which means registers need to be stored. Okay. What were the different variables that you are using. Okay. And what was the process stayed when I was doing a particular task. Okay. Again, is this making sense that this is the information which you will need to resume a process and this information that you have is stored inside a snapshot of the memory. Okay. Or rather a snapshot of the process. Now think about it. If a process is running it will in fact have all this information at the moment. If you take a snapshot of this process and store it somewhere that stored information is stored in a process control block. Okay. So process control block is a snapshot of memory which contains all this data about the running process. Okay. So now when the CPU or the OS is switching between the task it will know exactly where did I stop and it will know exactly where did I begin. So again we will see a illustration for this. So here we are saying that CPU is going to do one task at a time. Okay. And that is why we need context switching so that when it is switching between the apps or switching between the processes it can store the data. So suppose we are at process one as CPU is executing the the I can say information or the instructions of process one it maintains its process control block or rather as of now it is showing you all the registers. Okay. So what happens it is having all the memory it is executing and the moment an IO interrupt comes or any other interrupt comes the time slices over. The CPU will be pushed from the process or other the process will be pushed from the CPU and the OS says that now because I want to switch the app switch the process I will save the current context the save the current state of the process. So it creates a snap short of the memory which contains the process counter the program counter the current instruction or the next instruction the registers which I was using any pointer any other information. Then the scheduler will pick the next process whatever wants to execute and then it will restore the contact of the process B and then the same thing will happen process B starts running once I want to stop process B also again the snap short of the memory will be taken another app will be loaded and once you are loading this app I'm technically reloading its process control black block. And this again keeps on happening multiple times and this is known as context switching it means I get the information about the next process which I'm going to run in the CPU every time I switch between the task. It's like if two players are playing one game and it is not a multiplayer game two players are switching between the game time by time I can save if player one wants a break we save the game of player one then player two can play later when player two wants to take a break I can save the progress of player two and then again load player once game. And this will keep on continuing until all the processes or all the players are done executing is this clear everyone. So switching is very important it includes the CPU the CPU is involved there because that is where all the processes are going it will save a process control block every time. Should you learn also plays a very big role because scheduler is the one that picks which information you have to get. And then interrupt handler okay the question somebody is asking is that how does the OS know when to switch the context is loading and unloading done RAM to register and vice versa yes that is correct the loading and unloading will be done to registers back to memory back to secondary memory. Or wherever the process was stored okay secondly as any interrupt is caused like I am executing an interrupt comes that is when you take a screenshot okay similarly if the time quantum is up that is when you take a screenshot so depending on when you want to stop the current process running in the CPU that is when you will be taking a screenshot of the memory okay is this clear the information is saved for the memory. So it is saved first when you start the process information is saved one you when you terminate the process or you send the process into a waiting state okay. So interrupt occurs CPU is going to sort the state of the running process scheduler picks the next process and then the CPU is loaded with the PCB of the next process and then the next process starts is execution. Every time you are actually running a play pause play pause okay and this entire thing is known as context switching is this clear any doubt at the moment okay so this is how the computer remembers because I have a process control block that is how the computer knows which information to load where I have stopped what is the next instruction what is the memory I was using and every time I was using the memory. So with this we are done with processes and context switching okay so basically we have understood how multi tasking is happening deciding the time quantum is dynamic in nature as I told you 10 millisecond to 100 millisecond can be the time quantum depending on what size of process you are getting the OS decides what is the time quantum okay. Like we said that suppose if I have P2 P3 P4 and these are only 5 units 2 units 3 units 10 units now at this moment is a very large time quantum required do I even need 50 units of time no I don't at this moment I will make the time quantum very small maybe I make it only 2 units. So I can switch between the apps also switch between the process also it will be very fast and no processes waiting and there is less overhead also because all the processes keeps on ending okay but if you have P1 P2 P3 and P4 of 60 seconds 100 seconds 200 seconds and suppose 50 seconds now when such processes are coming is 2 units a very good time quantum is 2 unit a very good time quantum no if right now the time quantum is 2 units every process will keep on switching too fast and this will have an overhead okay increased overhead. So at the moment I cannot say time quantum fit between units rather maybe I say the time quantum is 50 units now the time quantum is 50 units even though I am context switching but am I doing it too fast that I have increased overhead no am I doing it too slow no okay it is just sufficient for my programs okay. So depending on what kind of task you are doing depending on what kind of scheduling algorithm you have the time quantum keeps on changing any other doubt. I will highly recommend you all to just take 2 minutes and go over the notes and see if you have any doubts over there. The cache memory okay. One second. This one. The same threshold which I was talking about as I told you that this was actually an example that how time complexity is also depending on a small input or large input like I can say that for smaller inputs maybe an algorithm of n square works better okay and for larger input only n works better maybe okay. Now when I restrict it to O of n I am saying that this algorithm is better for no matter if there is a small input or there is a large input but is that always true no it might not be true. All the algorithms start performing the best after a certain threshold okay they perform good after certain threshold so this threshold is something which is not given by the asymptotic analysis but if we are thinking in terms of iterations we might want to know this threshold after which this algorithm performs better so same thing we are saying for time quantum like I need to know the threshold at which I should make the time. Such that I can decide that if my burst time is too large then I take a bigger time quantum so that note too many context which is do not happen and in sufficient time I am able to change the data every time if the burst time is too small then I will make the time quantum also very small so that is the threshold value I am deciding but at this is the point where I feel like context which will happen optimally. Okay. Okay. So, you- Okay. Any other doubts? How does the OS know that the process is bigger small? Well, I'm not very sure about that. But I do know that yes, the OS will always know what is the time quantum for which the process is going to run. Like there can be certain programs which I feel like are going to start the moment my particular laptop starts until it ends. If it is a small user program, then also the OS will know that this is the execution time required for the algorithms. Okay. How exactly does that I'm not very sure about that. I will get to this in the next class. You also ask that where is the PCB getting stored cache or RAM? So exactly what happens because PCB has a lot of components. It has registers also, it has variables also. So that is where the concept of shared memory will come in. So the PCB exactly is stored in the RAM, but the registers that you have if they are frequently used, they are stored in the cache. So the memory basically is in cache. The PCB block which you have is in the RAM because technically if you think about it, the PCB entire structure cannot be stored in the cache because cache is just very fast accessing memory. So whatever important instruction is there, whatever memory you are using that is in cache, but the whole snapshot is available in the RAM. I can say that it is not exactly the RAM, but it is a very fast register like memory. In the next class that we have, I will show you a whole memory diagram. There you see how RAM, ROM cache is located everywhere. In the last class, I believe someone also asked that how the OS is stored in the ROM and not the RAM. But it is at least stored in the RAM only. There is a part of BIOS which is stored in the room, but the OS because it is active instructions is stored in the RAM. So if you must check your memory allocation in the computer, some part of RAM is always occupied and it is being occupied by the OS. BIOS is what you are referring to is stored in ROM. Same way that it does have some connection with the registers and the cache and the RAM, but it is not exactly the complete thing. Some part of it is reserved. I will show the diagram in the next class. Any other doubts? Yes, correct. So before we end the class, I have a small disclaimer for you all. Again, I am re-itrating that this subject will have a lot of theory. There is nothing that I can change about it. It is going to be theory. It is going to be textbook theory because that is what the subject is. But there are sub parts of the subject which are not just theory. As we will move on to CPU scheduling, CPU scheduling is theory. It is numerical and it is code as well. And when you see the code of CPU schedulers, then you will feel like it is too much code. Similarly, when we learn about concepts like paging, paging is also not just theory, but it is numerical also. It is codes also and those codes are also very, very large. Have you all discussed linked list in the DSA classes? There you must have seen the LRU cache. LRU cache implementation. How do you do it? Using the linked list. So don't you feel like LRU cache is actually a part of OS? Yes, cache is a part of OS and LRU is an algorithm. So you will see that algorithm here also. But does that mean you will just see the code? No, there will be a lot of theory which goes into LRU cache which you will have to understand. So I cannot really change the theory aspect of it, but we can try to make it more interesting. Like one of you gave me a good idea to use this illustrations during the classes. Now you guys tell me, did you like the illustrations? Should I include more illustrations in the next classes? Yes, okay. Great. Similarly, we will have quizzes also going forward. So the issue is that I have to add the quizzes during the class time, but there are some classes where I can't really make up any quiz. Like in the previous class, if you think about it, we just had the very basics of OS. Okay. So in the last, we saw the demo. Okay. But in today's class, we had the revisions because you now know what to answer in the quizzes. Okay. So going forward, we will have illustrations, we will have quizzes. And the next class is very interesting because it will have a lot of numericals also and coding also. Okay. So you have to bear with me for a couple of lectures when it's theory, but because it will get interesting when it comes to numericals and code. Okay. Apart from this, if you have any other suggestion to make the class more interesting, apart from changing the instructor, if you have any suggestions, what to do to improve the class, do let me know. I'll be happy to implement it. Okay. With this, I will show you a very small demo to see how multitasking is actually a thing. Okay. So just give me a moment. Okay. Can you all see the screen clearly? Okay. So here, if I write top slash OPID and run this command, you will see so many things happening. So here are these things. These are exactly the different processes which are running. How can I say that this is a process? You see this PID? This PID is the process ID. Every time you create a process, an ID is allocated to the process. Okay. And you are also able to observe how multiple PIDs are running. Multiple PIDs are running. Right. Is it always the same PID which you can see right now? No. Sometimes you see one. Sometimes you see 16, 17. Sometimes you see 9, 13. Okay. But this means that multiple processes are running together. Okay. You will see the chrome tabs are running. You will see terminal running. You will see the login page running. You see the compiler running. The top command itself is running. Okay. So you see the state. Every time you see a running state and a sleeping state. Running state means that right now my computer is running this particular command. Whenever it is sleeping, it means it is either in the ready queue or in the waiting queue. So you see this is a live demo of how the program that you are having on your desktop or on your laptop are running in parallel. Okay. So these processes or these programs which are there, I have not created them. Okay. I have just opened some applications and those applications are creating multiple things of its own multiple processes of its own in the next class that we have together. We will also see a small demo on how can we create our own processes. Okay. And it will be done by the phone command. Okay. So I will start with the next class. I believe this is clear to you all. Any questions at the moment. The same months are the same process itself. Okay. Like Chrome, if it's saying 1 1 1 1 it means it is the same process is running running running running. Okay. The state if you see was sleeping, sleeping, sleeping. So if the the PID is changing, it means it's a different process. It means it is the same process which is being shown multiple times. Okay. Because you will need to know the process every time that what is happening in the background. Okay. This has something to do with the sleep time. How much time is it the process going to sleep for when it be loaded back into the memory. So the system that you have will maintain date of everything. Remember I told you how PCB also contains the process state. Right. So that state is there. Okay. So every time it is being loaded in the memory even for one second. It shows you that this process is there. It is sleeping or running and doing whatever you should know what is happening. Okay. And this was not exactly the process state diagram that you are only able to see the reading ready queue. Okay. So you are only able to see the reading. Whatever is going in the background. If you must have seen even for the chrome, you had multiple different tabs of chrome. Even for the terminal, you had the ZSH different. Okay. You have the top command mentioned separately. You have the terminal mentioned separately. It means one program itself is having multiple sub programs. So that is what is being shown. Okay. Any other doubts anyone. Okay. They want to we might not learn the different types of OS. This is more than sufficient because if you go into the different types of OS are going to be all theory. We want to know about it. I can provide you notes regarding the same. Okay. So I suggest you two more things. There is a book. Three pieces of OS, which if you would like to read from a book, you can go ahead. And do that. Okay. So I'm sharing the link of the book. Okay. Very interesting book that but it talks more about concurrency. Okay. Similarly, if you want to see demos of more programs of how things happen in the back end. I will be covering that as well. But in case you want to see something extra, there's a Udemy course which I can recommend to you. Okay. I am not aware of the. YouTube videos. So I might not be able to give you a good suggestion for that. But for you, I mean there's a very good course of fundamentals of OS. And this if you want to you can purchase. Okay. Just. Okay. Just. One wants to go through that. Okay. So all the links have been added. I believe now the assignments are also being added as the class finishes. And we are done with two classes now. So at the end of every two class which are interconnected like the previous class and today's class was interconnected. I will provide you type notes also. Okay. So by and the end today you will see the type notes as well. It will be uploaded in the this note section of your class. Okay. Any other questions. Any other questions. If not, we can move on to taking the attendance. Okay. We will take the roll call now. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.