Cool folks, let's start joining in the class. We will get started in a couple of minutes. Oh, let me turn on the... Cool. Let's get started. Let me also share my screen here. Let me know when everyone can see my screen. Is it visible to everyone? Yes or no? Cool. And everybody can hear me also, right? So today we are going to work on a few case studies related to... Sorry, related to descriptive and inferential statistics. Let me quickly share this notebook with you. Before we start, does anyone have any question about the quiz? I believe we have the quiz today. We will try to wrap the session around 1150. And then you'll have to keep your bags outside and only laptops with you. That's all. Any questions, anyone? Cool. Okay. So first, we're going to start with the case study. Before I do that, I have a couple of questions for you. For a cute revenue distribution, which is more representative, you need not begin it. If I have a skewed distribution like this, something like this. Right? I have like this. Let's say this is revenue. So if I want the representative statistic, which one will be better? I have mean or mean. Sorry. Why? Why median? Right. So median will be a better stat here because these outlier data points or values that are specifically large but less in frequency can skew the mean towards itself. So mean might not be the right metric here. Median should be the right metric here. What is p value? What is p value? In plain language, what is a p value? Why do I use a p value? Anyone? So basically p value helps me judge whether to reject my name or to the other. If the p value is below a significant threshold value, which we also call a significance value, we can decide upon 0.05, 0.01 depending upon the industry. And I'm waiting against a p value to decide whether I need to reject or not reject my nal hypothesis. So in due to me, how surprising is that? That means if there were no nal hypothesis, what there is I'll be surprising or not. So that's the intuitive explanation for p value. So that's the basics. Now let's look at the problem statement that we'll try to solve. So we'll be leveraging the customer unit and select it by the input. And just give off gender age, income, weekly usage, fitness, maintenance, myelons, how much there is. So we're going to take a six, which make the customer buy particular equipment out of these things. So they have they said three models of equipment and we need to recommend. I think you figure out which type of user to buy this type of admin. So that's the goal. For the providing recommendations of treadmill for future orders, that's customers measuring the profile. So basically provide customer which product or which type of treadmill should we suggest that. So we're going to load the data. We are looking at this. This is how my readers look like. I have the product product would have three values. So that's about the last. Any questions. So far. Any questions anyone so far. Cool. So we're looking at the shape of the dataset. The types of each columns. Next we're also looking at the number of unique values in each column. So I'm simply running a follow over the columns. Any part of the product is the product. Similarly for other columns as well. So that's about initial data description. So that's about data look like what are the various columns. What are the data types how many unique values you have things like that. Lastly we're also looking at the null value check whether and. Any questions anyone so far. I think we have just discussed. It's just standard step security when we get a dataset. Any questions anyone. Any questions. Cool. So lastly we're also looking at the value counts like the frequency distribution of each. Basically each product if I have to convert it into percentage what. Any one. So today is your quiz. So I expect this basic level of understanding. In fact I'm going to see the position and issue what's red. Anyone. I have only the specific counts. How much percent of the difference is what changes to you. Anyone. It's a simple math question. Well, second and out nothing very fancy and I'm asking so pretty straightforward. You need to know this. I'm looking at the value. Then for education mostly I can see. I can see. Higher than post graduation. Medical status mostly are. That's the medical status distribution usage. This is the level of usage. Seven is high. It is. I think that. I think. That's about the data set distribution. Lastly I am going to convert things into numerical representation. I think. In case you are. Similar. Personal decision stock. Similarly that all of you can enter�. So I'm simply doing a replacement of the string values into numerical values. Any question anyone? Any questions anyone? I can see that there are some comments. Last lecture we did not do sanitization organization. I asked you to kind of go through the notebook. We can discuss towards the end. It's not something that is very difficult but still I can work you over through that. Have some of all the counts and then divide each my count. The logic is correct but how would you do that? That was my question. Cool. Once I have kind of converted the category of the system. I can give a correlation change. Although for categorical value correlation would make sense that much but for numerical value you could say the local number of the system. So if you can age, yes. As you can age. Age has significant, this is a lot of correlation. First of correlation with income. Age and income has a correlation score of 0.51. Which is kind of, you would have the answer to that. You know, most of the people you can be doing the income as well. So that makes sense. Let's look at other columns. Let's look at the income. Income is correlated with product. That means, those are the higher product which has the higher value which is this one. KP781. So that means it could be a case that if you could want to achieve the point 1 in the maximalắm William you show too much, because I never come up with that. Does anyone have any incomes? Any irrelevant, anyone, do you want to tell? If anyone had any income if he's going to keep doing that one. Cool. If you have any questions, that's how I think now you should be able to write up really something that's going to be discussed in the past. I'm going to visualize the same using a heat map. Again, we have done something like this in the past. Some inference points are written here. So, when you kind of revise in a book, we'll get those details like the most observations and things like that. Next, we are looking at the outliers of age, income and miles. Similarly, let's look at other columns. Income also has a significant number of miles from the average or the length. That means that quite a few people which have higher income that is quite distance from the general distribution. Same goes for miles. Does it make sense like miles is basically the number of miles or the distance that I have on the screen? So, why do you think I have any outliers? Anyone has any thoughts, any insights? Why does miles have so many outliers? See, not everyone is fitness free, right? Only the top level of individuals can know how much of a fitness free is available. That is because I think we will probably. So, that's why we are seeing very few people who have ran a lot of miles. This could be super fitness free, so even my view, running as a hobby. So, that's why we are seeing outliers. Next, we will look at a new way of treating or handling outliers. Till now, what are the two approaches that we have discussed for handling outliers? So, there were two methods that we discussed. Anyone? This is going to come into this way by the minute. I think about how to do that. If I need to remove the outliers, we have discussed two methods in the past. Yes, good. Yes, IQR and Z-school. Correct. So, if a data point is below this lower limit, which is Q1 minus 1.5 times IQR or above this upper limit, which is Q3 plus 1.5 times IQR, then they are considered as an outlier. Else, if their Z-school is greater than 3 or Z-school is less than minus 3, then they are also considered an outlier. So, when do I prefer one person, is there any way to do it? Yes. So, when you have distribution in the symmetry or normally distributed, you can go ahead with the Z-school approach, but if not IQR could be a more robust approach to do that. So, these were two outlier treatments. Alternatively, you can do one more thing. You can keep the data. Basically, I can clip the data between the 5th percentile and the 9th percentile. So, basically, if you think about it, intuitively, what we were doing in the Z-school, we wanted to, we were excluding the data points, excluding the data points that are beyond the plus 5 plus 3 standard interventions. Why it was within these two domains? I mean, I am of an 99% of the data comes. So, something similar is the idea here. I am going to clip my data set, or I am going to clip my data till 5th percentile on the lower end and 95th percentile on the upper end. So, somewhere here, I am going to clip my data set. You can see somewhere here. The rest, I can simply ignore. So, this is called keeping. That is what we are doing here. So, percentile values that I am looking at is what? 1.95, 1.95, 1.95, which is 99%. 1.95, 1.95, I think we have discussed in the past. So, this will give me the upper and lower limit. I will get an ampayla array of upper and lower limit, which will be my upper limit and which will be my lower limit. My lower limit will be the 5th percentile, and upper limit could be the 95th percentile, which is these two. And then I am using a function called LP.clip. Basically, 1.95, you will clip the file between the two layers that we have just created, lower end of the limit. So, it will kind of clip that. That means it will give me only this part of the data set. The rest all will be excluded. Any questions in this? Any questions anyone? Any questions anyone? Any doubts anyone? Cool. If no doubts, so this is going to happen for all three columns. So, I have found it is 50%ile value and then I am clipping or cutting the edges beyond these percentile values. Next, we are going to look at the scatter plots. So, this is basically called eEA-experative data analysis, we have discussed this extensively during the data visualization modules. So, I am plotting the scatter plots between the age and income. So, what is scatter plot individualize? What is scatter plot individualize? Correlation, yes. I can see how one variable is associated with another in terms of movement. I am lazy. So, I am going to look at the age. On the x-axis, I have plotted what? I have plotted age and on my y-axis, I have income. So, as you see age is increasing, I have to move it. So, that is the correlation kind of visualization for the age and income. Similarly, age and miles doesn't look any way to get the age and miles. Does not look any significantly more like this? I have seen that. So, this is the age and the loss. This is my idea of the time when I have a number of 30 and 40, it is kind of like in the highest number of miles. But, you have no correlation per se between these two. Then, income and miles, any observation from here? Any observation from here? Any observation from here? Any observation from here? Any observation from here? What are the ratios can you draw from this chart? x-axis, you have income, y-axis, you have miles. So, this is the chart. x-axis, I have income, y-axis, I have miles. Any observation that you have drawn from this chart? Any pattern that you can see? Sorry? We will look at our people. Right, very good. Good point. Let us say, if I kind of see, break the chart into two parts. Let us say at this point, I can see people below the income of 70,000, they are kind of clustered here. Max to max, they go 200 miles. Right? They are between like 50, even less than 50 to 200 miles. On the other hand, those who are having a higher income, their minimum miles is somewhere around 100. So, people with a little higher income are actually kind of running longer. That is a great observation that we can draw from this. So, what recommendation can you give to us? So, you can suggest them that, hey, look, you are running quite a few miles. How about I get expensive? Like the most efficient or the best product that we have, it will help meet your needs. And plus the good part of the income because they have a higher income. So, that is how you can kind of recommend your top-end product to these kind of customers. By on the other hand, to these type of customers, maybe you can recommend lower tier or the mid tier product because they have a lower income, less they could kind of be able to afford the lower and the mid tier. Any questions, anyone, folks? Any questions, any doubts in this? Anyone here? Cool. Let us go ahead. Next, we will look at a few more things. Analysis of the categorical columns with the product. Here, we are going to do a bi-bidding analysis. Will you make another analysis of the categorical columns? We will also be converting the age incomes and miles into bins using the binning concept. I am plotting a histogram. Sorry, KD plot for the age. So, SNS has just displayed every particular distribution in the past. So, as you can see age is kind of skewed, right skewed. Here, I am going to basis this distribution. I am going to kind of convert it into a bin. So, some of the points between minus 20, minus 20 does not make sense. It is just a limit. Someone like starting from 0. So, minus 120 would kind of come in less than 20. 20 to 25 would be 20 to 25. 25 to 30 will be 25 to 30. So, I am using the PD.CUT that we have used for the binning. These are the bins that we have created and these are the labels. So, we have converted the continuous binning age into the binning. We have seen this when we were discussing partners. Similarly, for the income, we will try to convert this into categorical buckets based on different income groups. So, I am taking based on the statistics. I am taking different type of elements. It is common between the DC, but it is basically commodity to bins. That is the whole goal. The same syntax just for the income column. Now, we have income bins as well. So, we have converted age and income into categorical buckets using the binning approach. Any questions, anyone? Any doubts? Any questions? I will take a pause here. Please ask if there are any questions. Cool. No questions? Okay. Similarly, we will do this for miles as well. Exact same logic, but doing for a separate column. You can go through this. Next is the visualization of the categorical columns with respect to my product. So, I have followed the categories. For all multiple types of product types, vectors, vectors, multiplications, vectors, panels, matrices, for behaviors are very kind of to make the products NoraLING and balloons, a new model is structured closely for state state producers and years of diversity. So, I機索, we would have passed all these free, at the one doing at the other. Cost of from the first product in the area. Or it can show that it is total and that it is the product and it is the product. This is the end. So on the x axis and have these category of the product and the y axis will be the product. They are taking the sum of basically the count of each. That's how I can kind of plot each category of the color of the respect to product. So here I have kind of divided. Then the division of the equation DIF means divide. So then I get the proportion. Think of it this way. For example, think of it this way. I have gender which is male, female. Then I have product 0, 1, 2. Let's say if there is this frequency is 10, 20, 30. So I will take a sum of this 10 plus 20 plus 30. That is 60. And then I will divide by this 60. So that I get that proportion. Any questions in this? Any question in this syntax? Any questions? This is something anyone has started? Any function in some function? These things have already started. Any questions? Round function is used for rounding off to two decimal places. Any questions? Cool. So if we look at this charts, what do you think? What insight can you draw? This is a dozed bar plot. Across the inverse and across the product. What insight can you draw? I think it is pretty clear with the insights from here. Quite a few distinctions across the two fingers. What do you think? Anyone? So out of all the surveys that you have mentioned, 50% or more than 50% are by KP2.1. So if a female customer kind of comes to your store or if they are kind of looking for a product, you won't even say them in the communication like email, add or something like that. Which for which production you should do? If the bonus spreader increase the sales. You will do it for people to wait for it. Suppose, I mean, it is in your stack. 50% are in the same, I have invested in KP2.1. While it's kind of true for male as well, but the other two are also balanced. But it's clearly the case that KP7.1 like females are a lot better than the previous ones. You have KP7.1 product. Is this clear? Anyone has any doubts? Any questions in this? Because I see it's lacking. Which kind of insights is particularly I believe we should be able to do that? Any questions, anyone? Any questions in the syntax? The code that we have written here. I have combined a bunch of functions that you have written individually. Any questions in this? Cool. There's no response. I'll assume that there are no questions. So, since we were running a formula on all these columns, you can see that we will get this plot for each and every column. Right? So, if you look at this chart above partner and single. There is not much distinction. The beginning of those is similarly combined into products. So, can't commit anything if somebody is partner and somebody is single. It doesn't affect much individually. And if you look at the usage. What do you think about the usage? So, if somebody is having 5, 6 and 7, you may even fold. 5, 6 and 7, 11 are usage. They are almost certainly by the 8, 7, 8. Can I formally comment that? If somebody is kind of at a usage of 11, 7, get shortly by K, K, K, 7, 8, 1. Because it's the proportion is 1. 100% of the customers who are at 7, have got K, 7, 8, 1. So, does that mean that I can certainly say? Yes or no? The answer is not exactly to be honest. So, simply as looking at the proportion, might not give you the right picture. If you remember, if you have been following along, when we did the initial value counts, when we were looking at the value counts for usage. See, there are only two customers who have a level of 7, the two people are sort of, they are just going to be two data points and get your kind of comment. Whether someone is, you know, if at their level 7, they'll surely buy this product. Generally, for statistical significance, you need more than 30 data points, but we have the right point. If I have two few data points, is there a strategy that we have studied in statistics? Is there a strategy that we have studied in statistics? When we have two few data points, but we still want to generalize, is information? Anyone? When you would have been studying, certainly with them, you can start by not talking about what sort of sampling, or who's sampling, where you kind of repeatedly sample data points, but do not keep them aside and keep, put them back in the set, those are kind of sample quickly. In the sample data, again, single user can come multiple times. So bootstrapping is one strategy that people's statisticians can really use if they have two few data points. But in this day and age of big data, there's no depth of data points, but you should still be aware of the concepts. Cool. So that's how you can draw the insights across all the plots, proportional distribution of the categorical column with respect to each column. I think it's almost different. If anyone has any questions, any doubts? Any questions, anyone? So start thinking intuitively about these things, because these are the things that I think really are going to do this time, and it's not just that they're cold. It's how you understand the business. So cool. Observations are... It's here, it can move forward, when you will kind of start revising it. Next, we will be dealing with probabilities. I think we've discussed probabilities in the past. Here, basic definition of potential probabilities. So we will see how we can calculate it one second. Why does this... Here. So see, next is kind of finding the probability distribution for each product. I think we've discussed this in the past as well. Let's also discuss this code in detail. Let me just take a screenshot. Cool. Let's look at this e-score cell one by one. From i-python.display input display. So i'm importing this function called display, which is even by default available, but still. So this basically displays the data. I was thinking about it before. So that data frames are actually displayed in a more visual, visually appealing fashion. Then I'm iterating over the categorical columns. These were my categorical columns. Here. These are my categorical columns that we have discussed. Like, then there are different things. So using the same list. So I'm iterating over each such column. Then simple print, print command, or gives a header. Then I think we've discussed this in the past, right? pd.cross tab. We're going to create a cross tab or a cross table between df of i. i is going to be the columns. For example, gender. Cross tab. For between each column, let's say df or gender for now. And the df of product. So two key things that you need to kind of look at here. Is the parameters that I've already. Margins and normalize. Does anyone know what normalize you do? Does anyone know what normalize equal to index will do? So normalize index will do this same operation. Sorry, it will do a vertical. Let's see. If this is my gender. Let's say male. Female. And I have these three products. Kp. Two, eight, one. Kp. That's a seven, eight, whatever values. And the distribution is something like this. So 20 male, 10 female, 30 male, 40 female, 50 male, 20 female. Right. So. When I kind of normalize at the index level, that is this parameter, normalize equal to index. This will do the following operation. So which is my index male and female. These are my index values. So. What is the total value 20 plus 10, 30? 30 plus 40, 70. 50 plus 20, 70, right. So it will normalize it will divide the absolute counts. With this total value. So 20 divided by 30. 10 divided by 30. 30 divided by 70. 40 divided by 70. So this will give me probabilistic distributions or proportions. Can anyone tell me how should I write these in probability notations? How will you read this table? Let's take an example directly from here. And we have discussed this in the previous case studies. How to kind of represent in a probability notation. So if I take this. And additionally, if you see I also have one parameter called margins equal to true. Margin's equal to is nothing but these total values. These are margins. That is 70, 70. These are total values. Now can anyone tell me how do I read this? How will you explain this table? How will you explain this to an interviewer? Similarly, for other columns as well. Anyone? So here that is the explanation in the given. In all of the events, what can you see the last domain all, which is this one. Which is all. These are basically the margins. So all. It consists of overall probabilities of purchasing of those three ten minutes. That is purchase of KPE 281 is 44.4%. How did we calculate that? It is nothing but is this an example, 3770. So you will divide by 170 here. So whatever columns would have been there, you would have just by total. So points were, so what is the rate of 381 percent and 282 percent? So this is the role of margin and normalize. Margin shows that you have get the total counts as well. And normalize simply divide by the total values. Any questions anyone? This is very important. If there is anyone that has questions, please ask. We have studied about this like cross-stabbed in the past. Margin is a normalizer to new parameters that we have discussed. But it is pretty intuitive. We are simply taking the totals and dividing by the total values. Anyone has any question? So the normalize take three parameters. All. In next any values. If you pass all, it will normalize over all values. That means let's see. This is an example that I am using. Instead of index, if I use a parameter called all, then it will normalize it over all the values. That means the total. 30 plus 70 plus 70, 170. So everywhere it will divide by 170. So that's what the parameter all does. Any questions in this? Any questions anyone? Cool. That's what the parameter all does. Then if we pass the parameter index, it will normalize over each row. I think lastly, it will incur it. When you pass the parameter index, then it will normalize over the row. So for example, 20 plus 30 plus 50. That is 100. So it will divide by this 100. Here. 10 plus 40 plus 20. That is 50 plus 20, 70. So it will divide by 70 here. And this is 170. So this will divide by 170 here. So this is when you pass the parameter as. Normalize equal to index, which is this value. Which is the original value basically, the index. Then this will be the behavior. Any questions anyone? Now if I change it to column, can anyone think what will be the behavior? If I pass the parameter columns, by which value will I divide? They pass the parameter columns, by which parameter I can expect. Anyone? So till now we have discussed all index, but we have passed the normalize as columns. Instead of index, I pass columns. Then it is going to normalize at a column level. That means, it is divided by this total value. So 20 divided by 30. 10 divided by 30. 30 divided by 70. 40 divided by 70. 20 divided by 70. So see, if passed columns, then it will normalize over the index. So this is about normalize parameter. Yes, margins is two. We will also normalize the margin values, which are these margin values. Any questions anyone? This is very important for calculated probabilities. I will take a pause here if anyone has any doubts. So let's, if no questions, let's take another table and try to read the values. Let's take the education one. So how do you read this table? See, this is the explanation. So if, so that's how you read it is a conditional probability. If the education is 12, why? Because you have normalize it over the index, that is, row wise. So it is given to you. Given that education is 12, what is the probability that someone will buy? Kp281, which is 0.67. Similarly, given the education is equal to 15, can you tell me, what is the probability that someone will buy Kp481? If it's given to you that education is 15, what is the probability that someone will buy Kp481? Which value will you look up? Looking at the table, can you answer this question? If I do, it is 15, what is Kp481? Probably it will be of Kp481. Anyone? See, that's how you read it. Given that education is 15, so this is the probability distribution for education 15. What is the probability that someone will buy? Kp481 will be this. So intersection of these two will be the answer, so 0.20. This is only when you have normalized over the index. When normalization parameter is actually index, then you can infer it this way. Any questions, anyone? Any questions? Is this clear, yes or no? So this is how you read conditional probabilities. And these are the marginal probabilities. The last ones, these are the marginal probabilities. Whether you have discussed conditional probability, the larger probability, the faster. Any questions, any doubts? Similarly, you can read each and every table that we have created above from the for loop. The insights are written here, but on these points, you can read a part. It's 11 or 5 and we are almost done with the probabilistic. One important part is cool. So with the probability distribution, now you have all the probability distributions. So, what will you create? What will you tell your business? Which type of customers should be recommended? So it's probabilistic, there are kind of conditions, first of all, it's under question. How will you kind of phrase this? You go into go ahead and say that look, if this is an example. If someone is at a usage level of 2, if someone is at a usage level of 2, the chances of them buying it is 27.5% So let's say when a customer comes to your store and your salesperson kind of asks them, okay, how much will you do? How much will you do? From that, you figure out where somebody is at the end of the store, you just read the search. So, if they are at the end of the store, they can recommend that you can do that. You can take them to the section where all the KP281 models are present. So that's how you can kind of recommend the product to us. And not simply, and give them a better buying experience. Cool. Now also, let's look at the multi-variant analysis. So I think this is something that is kind of not part of the syllabus. It's just for reference, if you want, you can take a look at this. Facta plots. So we will not discuss this. This will not be covered in your exams. But still, if you want to look at the chart or look at the code I hit. So, factor plots are not part of the syllabus. So, for now we can skip that. And kind of directly jump to. Recommendations for customer profile. Based on the analytics or the analysis that we have done, we need to create customer profile for our next few months. If you say, I mean, what type of customers will buy? You can create one for type of customer profile. Let's look at customer profile for the 7. So only we have to have an English English 7. Then over to 20.5 and all of them use KP7. So that's the greatest profile of analytics. This is what we have to do. I will just look at the final file. For 7.81, if somebody is kind of, somebody is having a little bit of 7.88, there are 5 or 5, 10 or we have the biggest customer for the product KP7. 7.81. And how did I get that? We did all the other analysis. And we saw how we did the other one with these charts. We just started that somebody is having a higher income, they are having more number of miles, things like that. So, based on the analysis, we have to come up with a speed that somebody having a higher income, higher number of miles. So, we have to make 7.81 is the higher income for them. You can go to the business file and then they will be 20.7. If one of them own conditions, I will be able to finish this satisfied. Along with the next definition. Income condition is the 7. They have to make 1.7. Only then they will be able to afford the product. So that's how you are going to kind of create a customer profile for KP7. Then you can also talk about the education level. If the education level is more than equal to 80, this is equal to 5.57. It's 5.10. And the person is at 200 miles. Then in that case, 80% of the KP7 is from. That means it's again, if the majority of this condition is satisfied, and the high-income usage is high, the poor quality is a big. So, in the 8.7. It's 1.5. Then in 80% of such cases, people prefer KP7.1. So, you can tell the business file that if. Like, 3 out of 4 conditions, as I said, it's fine that you can go ahead and take the. KP7.1. Similarly, you can also recommend when you not to the KP7. So, this is the concept of kind of creating an ideal customer profile. Here, you achieve this by using analytics and writing of the conditions or writing on the insights that you have created. So, I have listed for all the three products. I explained what KP7.1. I would ideally want to try to do this. Although, the customer profiles are kind of displayed here for both the rest of the two products. But, ideally, I would want to you to go home, do the analysis for yourself, and I don't have to do this in two minutes. Solution, anyway, I have it. So, it's just that you should at least try this on your own. Just the way I have kind of created for 7.8.1. You will have to pay it for 2.8.1 and 4.8.1. And solutions are there for your reference. So, that's about the probability distribution or the conditional probability is study for aero city. Sorry, aero fit. This one more case study for a ball mat, which I will cover in the next class. Before and we have some normalization, standard, and concept lab that we can cover right now. But, before I close this, does anyone has any questions? Any doubts in the probability part or question? This is the main part. Finding the probabilities and extracting these insights. How do you create customer profiles? So, these are important parts that you need to understand. If there are any questions, please ask. Then, I would take it as no questions. Let's quickly cover the leftover part that we had from the previous class, which was, I believe, around feature engineering. Then, there's one more task left, which is the ball mat case study, where we will use central limit theorem, which you might have studied in the previous semester. We will discuss that in the next class. It's not a very long case study, it's a smaller one. So, we will try to wrap this early because we need to prepare for the quiz as well. So, I think in the last class, we had done till the encoding part and normalization and standardization was left. Before I start, if you want a five minute break, we can do that. It's 1113. Let's come back by 1118. Let's come back by 1118. You You You You You You You You You You You You You Well, we could be making the script, becoming a 5.臧 You You You You You You You And Was You You You You You It Ku Our Let's start looking into the column normalization standardization. So let's look at the problem that we face. In some of the machine learning models like simple linear regression, basically we cannot, in simple, elite models, we cannot have columns that are of vastly different scales. For example, let's say you are working on a health data set where somebody has, you have data about height, which is in centimeters, and then you have weight, that is in kilograms. Are these two comparable? Are these two comparable? Can you compare centimeters with kilograms? Somebody can be let's say 145 centimeters, 151, 165, whatever. While somebody can be like 50 kgs, 65 kgs, 52 kgs. So clearly, these four are different scales. And technically you cannot kind of compare them. And for some of the models, there is a concept of optimization, where they kind of learn the pattern in them. It becomes difficult for the models to learn different differences in scale, because of differences in scale. So the learning process kind of becomes a little difficult. And it takes time. To solve that kind of problem, we kind of try to bring them into the same scale. How do we do that? There can be multiple strategies. One is called standardization. Have you folks have this term standardization before? Don't tell me no because batch B said yes. So then what is standardization? What is standardization? So in standardization, we try to scale the data sets such that the mean of the distribution becomes zero, and standardization becomes one. How can I do that? How can I do that? How do I get mean zero standardization one? If I want to convert mean zero standardization one for weight column, how can I do that? This has been taught in the previous class, previous semester basically. There is a method. Is your grading by the way relative? How does the grading happens? Does anyone know? Elitiv to both the batches, like all three batches, or just respective to your batch. Batch B is ahead, folks. I asked this question and they gave me answer in just like 15 seconds. So you might have shared it about these scores, where you kind of subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation. So standardization is process of kind of the one video or data set into the these scores. Once you do that, you achieve a distribution which has a mean zero standard deviation of one. So for example, if I have to kind of calculate the Z score or do the standardization for this column, how will I do that? And first thing to me, 15 plus 65 is what they do, that is 100 to 161, 167. So 167 by 3. So 167 by 3. 3 times 5 is 15, then one will be left with again 515, 2.66, something like this. So 55.66 or 51.67 will be your mean. So you will subtract 50 with 55.67 and you will divide it with whatever standard deviation you will get. Similarly, 65 minus 55.67 divided by 65 sigma, 52 minus 55.67 divided by sigma. So you will get your Z scores and this will be your standardized distribution. Similarly, you can do it for high-level. Similarly, you can do it for any column that you have. So this is the process of standardization. Where you kind of try to bring the distribution with the mean zero and sigma one. And I will do that, we will just simply use the Z score. In Python, we will not actually do this. Like Z score can be used and we have functions for that. We have libraries that help us do that. So that's how we will do it. But the technique, they are generally points under this. Then the second thing that we will look at is min max normalization. Or normalization in general. So here the goal is to kind of convert the dataset into a fixed range between zero to one. So all the data points will now die in the range of zero to one. And how do you do that? You do that by the following x minus x minimum divided by x max minus x minimum. Now if you have to do min max scaling here or min max normalization here, how will we do that? What is the minimum value in this column? 145. And what is the maximum value? 165. So you are going to apply the formula x minus x min 145 divided by x max minus x min. That is x minus 145 divided by 20. So just start placing x. So first x is 145. So 145 minus 145 divided by 20 is actually zero. Next is 151. 151 minus 145 by 20. That is what? 6 by 20 or 3 by 10 or 0.3. Lastly 165 minus 145 by 20. That is 20 divided by 20 which is 1. So after the min max normalization, your values are these. So it simply replace them with these values. So this is 0.3, this is 1. So now you notice from 145 to 165, I have finished. I have reduced the scale to 0 to 1. Now the scale is actually 0 to 1. Now if you do the same for weight as well, you will have both the columns in the same height and it can be compared. Is that clear? Any questions in these two processes? The simple mathematical operation? Any questions? Any doubts? So let's see how will we kind of implement them in the code? But before that let's also look at the visualization aspect of it. So you see what happens? This was the actual data. See, the statistical analysis is one of my assets. It is spread also for this. But when you kind of normalize it within 0 and 1, so all the values be not exactly the same. They are within 0 and 1. On the other hand, after standardization, they are centered around 0. You see the main difference is that, before you just put it across the, you can put it in 0 and your standardization becomes much. So this is the visual representation after normalization, there are first. Is that clear? Any questions? Any doubts? Any concerns? Cool. So again theory is there. You can read about notes here. Let's see how will we kind of implement it. So this is the data set that we were using in the previous class. That was related to low navigates. We will apply the standardization on an initial process. So first, let's see the, let's say an example of loan amount will start with loan amount. I can see that this is like of scale 128, 66, while who up other columns like the loan amount is in double digits. So it's scales are different. So let's see how we can kind of scale loan amount. So first, I'm going to do standardization. For standardization, I'm going to do the particles and it's. So this is the general library for the scale. This is a library where all your machine learning models classical machine learning models are also present. So this module has separate some model with the processing. Three process means which was beginning to the model you need to pre process the data which is encoding scaling. So this is the model pre process. So from the pre process, some model will be importing a function for standard. This standard scalar will help me standardize the data. What the standardization X minus node divided by sigma which is converted into this E school. So that's standard scalar. What is the first step that I'm going to do? First step is I'm going to instantially object. Then I'm going to need an object. I'm going to instantially object. I'm going to instantially object. I'm going to instantially object. So standard scale will be. Then which column did I want to scale? Loan amount. So I'm applying this standard scale function using a function called fit transform. Just like in part I understand about the otherwise object. Side view and element of the one fit transform. That is fit this time here. Fit this scale. And transform the base. It is the type that fit this here. And transform this data set by fitting by fitting what we mean by fitting we mean. Let's say I have the loan amount term. Loan amount. And we need to do. Z score calculation. So for this score I know I have X minus mean by standard deviation. So I need the mean. So by fitting I mean find the mean and standard deviation. And by transforming. I mean apply this formula that is X minus mu by sigma. So finding the mean and standard deviation and then transform. We're kind of applying it. So this is. Equivalent applied function in context. So once this process is done you can compare the minimum max value. Earlier before scaling my minimum loan amount was. And the maximum was. But post scaling. The value is minus 2.70. And this is after the scaling that I get the output. Any questions in the syntax. Any questions anyone will be inspired. So this is very important when you will move to the next semester when you will have machine learning as a course. These things will be used in the middle. So at that point in time your instructor might not kind of repeat this. Because you're expected to do this by now. Cool you can visualize the data set also using. Instagram and. The plots we have seen is in the past. The scale has changed on the left side. Because. So that's about it. About the standardization. See the distribution does not seem to be the distribution is still the same. This is the back unit. So the data set is exactly the same even after the scaling. This is minmax normalization as we discussed. We need to convert the value to 0 to 1. Now the engine is the inside. Again we're not going to do it mathematically by hand. We have a function in the pre-processing layer. Steps are the same. Just the way you created standard scalar object. But one thing we note after the minmax scaling. The values are now between 0 and 1. Not between some other values. But again the concept say the distribution still stays the same. If you plot the data before. The distribution is exactly the same. It says that the scale has changed. So the scale has changed. But the distribution still says exactly the same. If you see the left chart is exactly the same as the chart in terms of distribution. So the key point is that the scale does not change. The data distribution stays the same. Is it the scale has changed? Any questions? Any doubts? So that's about standard scaling and minmax normalization. Right now we have done on single columns. You can do it on the complete data set as well. Here. For example here. I have created a minmax scale object. And now. I will write it. You see as I can write the line to cool and reach out. So what is this process? Consume where I take a function and apply to an error. And it gets applied to the pool error. When you do not do it column by column or root value by value. It just get applied on the whole structure itself. He discusses in a fire. Where I think of how to and applies to the whole data structure. Let me give you one more hint. What is this example? Where we had an ampie area of this. And we wanted to square it. One approach was to use a for loop. And we did I squared. Where we do it one by one alternatively. I use a function called np. Power whatever function it was. Applied the array and change the power to two. What properties are what concept and the line. Are the np functions used? Yes. The concept of vectorization and broadcasting. So the same concept is kind of applicable here as well. It's just a different function. Any questions. If you notice that the distribution has changed. Earlier it was hundreds and number two. It's not between zero and one. So there's a quick question. You're working with the data set. Where the height. Secret is measured in centimeters. And the width is measured in kilograms. You decide to standardize the data. What will be the mean and standard deviation of height after standardization? Yes. Because we have applying standardization. Where after standardization is the mean and standardization. The mean becomes zero. A standardization becomes one. So the answer to this question will be. The option with mean zero and standard deviation one. Is this clear to everyone? Any questions? Any doubts? Cool. So some more theoretical part. Theory is here. You can read about it. Practice question is I think already in your assignments. And assignments I think for today's class are also unlocked. You can. Okay. Let me unlock that. Oh, I'll have to ask the team. I'll have to ask the team. So I'll have to ask the team. But anyway, today is a quiz. So you can do the assignments afterwards. I can quickly. Because we need to wrap the class by 1150. Because we need to conduct the quiz. So let's quickly move to the attendance part. I would need one person to. Take the photos. Can you please comment take the photos. So I've quickly started the doubt session. Anybody has any questions. Before we start the quiz, any questions about the quiz or anything in general. Cool. If no questions, then we can end the class. Do the attendance and go for the quiz. Thank you. Thank you.