Let's settle in. This is batch A right. Cool. How was the quiz for everyone? How did you find it? Was it easy? Was it medium? Was it difficult? It was easy. Good. So, similar level of questions you can expect in your in-term quiz and in your final set, basically the final exam, we'll have few coding questions as well, like I think around four five coding questions that you'll have to do. Cool. Last time I think we covered, we were not able to cover confidence levels. So, let's see that today. Confidence intervals. So, this is something very important from your exam perspective. So, let's discuss this quickly. Folks, now let's just not talk please. Let's try to focus now. Cool. So, today we'll start looking at something that is known as confidence intervals. So, we will not go into very deeper depth of it. We'll discuss the basics and then I'll give you a case study that you can get a better level at home. So, basically what's the problem here? Let's say we have a point estimate. You want to kind of figure out, just to show us a and they ask how much that's that and we looking to see the answer to the question. How much is this that you looking at? So, let's say you give an exact answer. It's exactly 20.3 pounds or 20.2 pounds in a kilo of less. So, since you are not giving this one exact answer, it's a point estimate. But how sure you are that it's going to be 42.3? How sure we can be whether it's going to be 42.3? For example, if I ask any one of you, like what's your weight? You can say that, my weight is what? That's a 64 kilograms. But how sure you are? It could be 64.0, 1 as well. It could be 63.99 as well. So, when you give a point estimate, you can't be always correct because absolute values rarely are absolutely correct. So, that's the problem that we also faced with in data science as well. When we are kind of working with sample of data, for example, if you want to answer this question, the exact average salary of all the data scientists in the world, the exact average salary of all the data scientists in the world. How will you estimate this? Anyone? So, how did you get the 30 lakhs number? How did you guess it? Why 30? Why not 40 lakhs? Why not 50 lakhs? Why not 10 lakhs? Why 30? Why 30? Like he mentioned 30 lakhs. Okay, per annum, right? But why only this number? Why not some other number? If you have calculated, how will you do it? He mentioned 30 lakhs, but the question talks about the world. In US, the starting salary is not a thousand dollars, that's what 80 lakhs are. So, that anyway, it's self-conscured data set. So, yeah, if you have to kind of calculate this metric, how will you do that? Exact average salary of all the data scientists in the world. How will you do that? Anyone? Any thoughts? Will you take a? So, you will go to every data scientist in the world, ask this salary and pick the average of it. But is that approach feasible? Like, is that possible? Will you be able to do that? So, that's, sorry, but even for median, you'll have to ask this, you know, you'll have to go to every country in the world, pick up every data scientist that is present in that country, ask for their salary, create a data set, then kind of end either main median, whatever you want. That is not possible, right? You cannot, like, what, what are the hundred, hundred, hundred, hundred, hundred plus countries in the world? You can't do that. This is just one example, right? Almost every time you go, you will not ask the global, or you will not have the complete data, you will not have the whole population data, right? Population need not necessarily mean the world's population. Population could be in respect of that particular business as well. For example, flip-cars population could be all the customers, flip-cars, and several companies, not necessarily the whole population of India. So, population would be in their sense. But the point here is, you cannot get the whole population of this data. It's simply not feasible to get that data and extract statistics, do analysis from it. So, what do we do? We use the statistical concepts here. We work with samples, right? Now, let's say you have 5,000 samples from, let's say, all the data centers in the world. We just took 5,000 samples. To make it easy, let's make it India. Look for simple statistics, let's make it India. So, somehow you kind of got from some social media or some, whatever platforms where people kind of upload this, like Glassdoor, Levels or FII, other platforms. You got the data 500 data centers. Now, you have 500 data points, a sample of 500 data points of their salaries. Now, using these 500 data points, using these 500 data points, your goal is to kind of estimate an average salary for all the data centers in India, that will be represented for the whole country. Let's take one more example. When elections happen in our country, you would notice that before the results come out, news channels start kind of showing this part, which will be in the minus this part of our country. How do we do that? What is that called by the way? Exit polls. Has anyone ever received any of your family members ever received an email from those exit poll calculators to take your opinion? But how can they say that the India has voted for this particular party? This much percentage of population have voted for this party, when they didn't ask you, because you are also part of the population, right? Because it's simply not feasible to ask everyone in India, like who they voted for. So, they take a sample, so they pick samples from each section of the society, a sub sample of each section and they ask their opinion and then try to generalize or generalize their responses to the whole country. So, that's the whole goal. That's what we will look at here. Cool. So, we will not be able to tell precisely, like what exactly is the average salary of all the data centers? What we will be able to comment is something like this, right? We will take a concept of confidence interval. Instead of providing a signal for a dial best guess, like you did 30 likes. Instead of that, that's a point of point. It's given. We provide a range of possible values that quantify our uncertainty. For example, you can say that the average salary of all the data centers in India is in the range of that's a 20 to 30 likes. This is what you can say, but not again, but just this will not be the only statement that you will make. You will say, I am x percent confident with x percent confidence. Now, this x can be 95, 90, whatever. So, an example of how you can say that, I can say that 95% confidence, the average result is salary in India is 20 to 30 like per annum. So, what does this mean? What does this statement mean? With 95, my screen is shared, right? People are, okay, good. With 95% confidence, the average salary of data centers in India 20 to 30 likes. Now, you tell me, what does this mean? How do you interpret this statement? What's your interpretation of it? Anyone? Anyone in thoughts, like, what is the interpretation? With 95% confidence, the salary of the data centers in India is 20 to 30 likes. So, basically, what we are trying to say is, we are 95% confident. We are 95% confident that the true population, the true average salary, true average salary of all the data centers in India, 9 to the same. It could be 25, 22.5, right? We are saying with 95% confidence, whatever the true population means or the true average salary is, therefore, liability, this bracket. Or, I can say that, if I, like, I did this sampling, right? I had a sample of 500 people. So, if I do this sampling process 100 times, if I, one experiment, I asked 500 set of people, in second experiment, I asked another 500 set of people, in third experiment, I asked another 500 set of people. I do this thing 100 times, and I kind of calculate the population or calculate the means of it. I can say 95% of the time, this is the range I am going to calculate, 20 to 30 likes. Is this understood? Is this clear to everyone? Any doubts, any confusions in this? Anyone? Who let me ask you one question? You can expect this type of question even in your exam. Let's say, at a company, there are analysts who are calculating the sales projection. Sales projection, that means, they are going to estimate how much sales the company is going to make, how much products that the company is going to sell in this financial year. So, they have come up with this statement. We have 95% confidence with 95% confidence. The annual sales for this financial year would be, let's say, 20,000 US dollars to 25,000 US dollars. But the goal of the company was to sell, like to have a sales of 30,000 dollars. Do you think this goal is achievable in this financial year? Do you think this goal is achievable in this financial year? Do you think this goal is achievable? Why no? Because this amount, again, certainly, we cannot 100% be sure that it is not achievable, again, because our confidence is 95%. There could still be a 5% chance that this might be achievable, but again, we are 95% confident that this is going to be our annual sales. This is going to be our range. And clearly, this lies outside the range. So, with pretty solid confidence, never, I can say that this might not be able to achieve this. Is that clear? So, you can kind of get a direct question, even in one of the easy questions, like, is this achievable or what is your interpretation of this out of the four options? Something like this. Is that clear? Any questions, anyone? Any doubts? So, that's about, yeah, I have given some notes here. So, when you revise it, you should be able to, you should go through it and you should be able to understand. Let me also share this notebook. Cool. Let's also take a look at bootstrapping. What is bootstrapping? So, traditionally, finding confidence interval required rigid mathematical form as in state consumption. For example, the data must fall over perfect value. But in real world, you lay that means, that the assumption is as I expected. In reality, you will see a perfect real world data is very messy and, you know, with your own studies, it is very difficult. So, you're basically dealing with something complex using this messy data. So, how do you ensure that you still are able to kind of get the rights and of statistics? So, here comes the bootstrapping. So, how does this work? So, instead of gathering new data every time, instead of going to whatever sources you have and asking for data, instead of using more and more data, which is an expensive time, you can do as we discussed that, if you want to kind of find the average salary of every data center, you will have to kind of ask every data center, then come up with this data, which is going to be expensive as well as time consuming. So, you may treat the original samples, let's say, the initial 500 samples, and you do. As a mini unit, but it's a mini compilation. And using that 500 samples, 500 or 500 samples that I initially received, I am going to simulate new samples just using that. So, what am I trying to say is that if I am able to kind of get somehow 1000 data points about average data center salaries, right, about ds slash mle slash e i engineer salary, I am going to use only these 1000 data points, and my goal is to kind of estimate the average salary. So, I will use these 1000 data points only to simulate new data points and new universes. So, how can I do that? First step is resample with replacement. Because sample has 100 data points, randomly, we should be counting each, and we just ask how weight data points, random 100 data points from it. Let me change this. Yeah, so, it's a sample as 1000 data points, randomly we counted data points from it, because you sample with replacement, some goes with the pick up twice, and some go to pick that off. So, that means, see, from this, these 1000 data points, these 1000 data points I am going to pick 100 points, right, let's say I pick the 100 people or 100 salaries, but I am not going to exclude these 100 points. These 100 points still say, stay inside this 1000 sample, and I am going to do this repeatedly. So, let's say this is sample 1, I take another sample, sample 200 points, from the same data points, from the same data points, and I do this repeatedly in number of times. Now, I have a question for you, can points repeat, can some of the points repeat in this sample? Like if this had say a data point, next, can, next data point in any of the other samples? Why? Sorry? Because we are taking an randomly second, we are doing it with replacement, that is, if I took out 100 people, if I took out 100 people from this sample, I am not subtracting those, I am not doing 1000 minus 900, sorry, I am not doing 1000 minus 100, next sample does not come from the remaining 900, the next sample is also coming from the same data point, and since I am doing randomly, there are chances that somebody do all that, S1 could also be at S m also. Is that clear? So, this is known as sampling with replacement, you are taking the points, you took out the sample, then you put it back in the 2nd sample for a second time. So, this is known as sampling with replacement, then we are going to calculate the statistic, let us say if you want to find the mean sample, I am going to complete the mean of this bootstrap sample. So, S1 will have a mean 1, mu1, mu2, mu3, like this is the average salvy, average salvy, till mu n. So, have sample and took out the mean n number of times. So, we are going to repeat this process, it will be 1000 minus 10, 10, 10, n number of times, fuel basically end up with the reset into step means. Now, we are going to find the cutouts, actually before I move to the next step, which distribution will be the sample means follow. So, if I let us say plot, decide to plot these means on a chart, histogram, what type of distribution can I expect? Basically, what will be the distribution of these sample means? What will be the distribution of the sample mean? Why? Why it will be normal? So, your answer is correct, it is going to be normal. So, these are basically sample means, distribution of sample means, this is going to be normal, but why is it going to be normal? Why is this going to be normal? Anyone? Any thoughts, why is this going to be normal? Is there a theorem that governs this? Law of Light, does not say that it will be normal distribution. Something related to that. Law of Light, numbers says that you are treated something in your, your let us say expected probability or experimental probability will be close to the actual expected probability, but it does not talk about this distribution. Precisely. Anyone? Yes, who is this FCFS? Right answer. So, have you ever studied about central limit theorem in your previous semester? Do you remember the central limit theorem or all the CLD? The central limit theorem says that if you do repeated bootstrapping or repeated sampling with replacement and take the average of those samples and kind of plotted or basically basically these average of these average samples should follow a normal distribution. This is coming from the central limit theorem. So, that is what the central limit theorem says. Now, you have the cool. How much data point, how many data points, like what percentage of data points lie within two standard deviations of a normal distribution? Let us say this is two standard deviations. Sorry, 95. So, 95 percent of the data. So, now maybe you can start relating to where does the 95 percent term comes from. Now, we know that the average of these samples follows a normal distribution and we also know the fact that within two standard deviation plus minus two standard deviation, 95 percent of the data. That means, if I get of sample 100 times 95 times my expected average is, you know, bound to live in this in this area. So, let us say we take the confidence of 95 percent or you can say whatever confidence you want to choose. So, this is called finding the data. For a 95 percent confidence interval, chop off the bottom of the point 5 and the top to point 5. That means, if this is 95 percent, what is the leftover area? If this is the center part is 95 percent, what is the leftover area? 5 percent and this is equally divided because it is a symmetric curve. So, it will be 2.5 percent here and 2.5 percent here. So, that is why the notes are saying that chop off the 2.5 percent from here 2.5 percent from here. The values left in the middle is your confidence, is coming from your confidence interval. So, that means, if you want a 95 percent confidence interval, that will be the central region. The values that are presented in the central region will be within your confidence interval. Is this clear? Is this clear everyone? Any questions? This can be complex at the first class, you will have to revise again read the notes. But if there is any question please ask. Now, how do I kind of estimate the exact values? What if you have talked about what is pure theory? Yeah. If we decrease the, okay. Will it be more accurate or inaccurate? How it will be accurate? So, think in this way, think in this way. Again, you are sure, you are aware that 95 percent of the data lives between this two boundaries, right. If I increase it to three standard deviations, then it is more than 99 percent. That means, all the data almost comes here. So, if I expand the boundary or expand the confidence interval, my accuracy increases. But if I decrease the boundary, look at here, right. So, if you said that, I want to decrease the confidence, let us say, we are decreasing to this area. So, this is less as compared to the above one. This is like shortly as a 95 percent. Let us say this is 50 percent. So, there is only 50 percent chance that you are expected or that your true population would lie to your confidence becomes, as you decrease it, your basically confidence becomes lower or you become less accurate. Think in, think in this again. Let us say, you want to estimate, let us say you want to estimate my height. You want to estimate my height. You can say that you was somewhere between whatever numbers, right. 157 to 158 centimeters. This could be one range or this could be minus infinity to plus infinity centimeters. So, where you should be more confident than the first one or second one. Why? Second would be more confident, no. Because this, I might be like 159, right. So, I am definitely outside your range. I might be 156. This might, again, definitely outside your confidence range. But whatever number I am, whatever centimeters I have, it is surely going to be in this range, no. I cannot be more than infinity centimeter tall. I cannot be less than minus infinity centimeter tall. So, as you set or as you expand your intervals, your confidence increases. As you shrink it, your confidence decreases. Does it make sense? Any other questions, anyone? Any other questions? Cool. So, that is about confidence intervals. So, we were kind of calculating here, right. Cool. So, now how to estimate these values? How to estimate this range? Like, for example, we set 20 to 30 lakhs, right. Somewhere here. So, how do we get these values that we boundary? So, the formula for the 95 percent confidence is, like, for calculating the boundaries at 95 percent confidence intervals, is sample mean, which is the mean of these samples, the mean of these values. Plus minus 1.95 if I am not wrong, let me check the values. 1.96. 1.96 times the standard error. Why 1.96? Because, see, we discussed, right, in a normal distribution, 95 percent delta, I mean plus minus 2 standard deviations. So, corresponding Z score for the 2 standard deviations is 1.96. So, this is the Z score. Because, it is a normal distribution, we can use the Z score, which is the Z distribution. So, for plus minus 2 standard deviation, the Z score comes out to be 1.96. So, this is nothing but the Z score of it. If you want to do at a 99, 9 percentile or 99 percent confidence intervals, then sample mean plus minus whatever Z score lies at 99 percent confidence plus into the standard error. You can either Google it to a Z table lookup or simply, you just type I dot stats function, you will get the Z score corresponding to this, right. So, this is one table lookup again. Is this clear? Is this formula clear to everyone? Any questions in this? Any questions anyone? If no, then answer this question. What is the formula for standard error? What is standard error? Must have been said to remain no doubts and what is standard error? Sorry. X minus mu upon, this is not the standard error, this is the Z score formula, this is the Z score, this is not standard error. Z score I have already given you 1.96. What is the standard error? Standard deviation by very good. Yes. So, standard error is calculated as standard deviation of the sample distribution, which is this again, the samples that we have taken, standard deviation of this divided by root n. root n is n is number of samples or number of times you have kind of done the sampling. If it is 1000, it is going to be 1000, if it is 100, it is going to be 100, whatever. So, this is the formula for standard error. Is that clear? It is just going to be simply plugged in here. Any questions anyone? If not, let us quickly see the implementation in Python as well. So, whatever I done here, I have taken a sample data, which is coming from a exponential distribution, which is coming from an exponential distribution. These are the samples, how many sample data points have taken? 100. The scale parameter for exponential distribution is 5. So, you might have studied in the previous semester what is exponential distribution. This parameter it takes lambda. So, this lambda that we have taken is 5 and there are 100 data points. I am using simply numpy library, numpy library, we have the probability distributions. So, because randomly sample, and we don't randomly sample, how many exponential distribution? But lambda will find and size means how many data points that have to be 100. Eventually, take a non-term distribution, because I am going to show that the boost that relates to a distribution. What is np dot r number c2? The later you know, what does this speed function? What does this speed function do? So, speed function makes sure that your results are actually applicable. So, whenever you run, because it is a random number, random can be identified out of numbers what we can, if we want to sample one number randomly, it could be 2 in 1 iteration. The second iteration if I get the number randomly, it could be 7. So, whenever you run this again, you could expect a different result, because your random number is empty. Everything is random. But when you put the c, what it do? You can put any random set, whatever is the standard random state. So, whenever you read this code, you will get exactly same result, exactly same sampling again and again. So, you sample this and I have run a sample mean, round it to 2 decimal points. Let us say the example is websites, data, and minutes. How many, for how many minutes you stay on a website? So, the sample data from the sample data, you can say it is 4.57 minutes. This is sample mean, not the population mean. So, from the 100 sample 100 data points, the international is 4.57 minutes. So, on an average from the sample, people say 4.57 minutes on a website. Now, from the sample, I want to estimate what could be a global population mean line. So, basically in this function, I will take data periods. Periods mean how many times do I want to sample it? Confidence level, like what is the confidence level? I want to achieve point 205 sample. Then, I have created a list. Here, I am going to store these means, basically these means that we were calculating these values. This is what we are going to store in this list, which that means n is simply the length of the data that is the number of data points. Then, I am I created the one basically I am going to sample n number of times. Here, if you remember, we sample n number of times, you know, mu 1, 2, mu 2, 3, mu n. That is exactly what we are going to do. We did a sampling from these 1000 data points. This time, we will do from 5th, sorry, 100 data points. How many times? For how many times am I going to sample? Periods number of times. Periods is 5.5. You can change it to 500, 1000, whatever you want to do. It is a parameter that we can achieve. And then, you sample again for 5,000 times. Np dot random dot choice is nothing but picking up a sample randomly. So, I am randomly picking up how many data points and data points? N would be, make up data, so I am picking up 100 data points. Or it could be any number that you want to pick up. Right? Replace equal to 2. Replacement will be replaced by the bootstrapping as we discussed here. That put back the data points, so replace equal to 2 means bootstrapping. And then, I am taking a B sample not B, bootstrapped sample not B and appending to this list. Take a look at these few lines carefully and ask if there is any doubt in the syntax. Is there any question in the syntax? Any doubts, any questions in the syntax? It is fairly straightforward. Some of the functions might be new, but as you keep on doing that, this thing will encounter the problem. I will give you a sheet of functions, where it is in the vector. But any questions in these four lines? Four five lines? Cool, because you can expect this type of a coding question, where you will kind of ask the complete dysfunction of the data function that does bootstrapping or that does sampling or that does some of the other things that you have studied or you have been going to study. So in the coding questions, you can expect this. Next, right, I am estimating the lower bound and the upper bound. So what is the lower bound going to be? Let us try to see this. So, as you might, so this one list would be one way. I could, we know that this is the normal distribution, right? We know that the sample is going to follow a normal distribution. I can simply filter and it is if 95 percent confidence. So, if you think about it, let us say this starts from this is going to be the minimum value, right? And this is going to be the maximum value. So what is the percentile for the minimum value? 0 and maximum is 100 percentile, right? And 95 could be somewhere here, right? A value that lies there is a 95 percentile. Now remember what we discussed earlier. We are chopping off the, right? We are chopping of the 2.5 percent from each end, right? So, if I want to go back 2.5 percent from here, if I go back 2.5 percent from here, from the end, if I subtract 2.5 percent, which percentage value will it be? 97.5? Yes or no? This was the maximum value. This was the maximum value which is 100 percentile. Now we discussed earlier that we are going to go, we are going to chop off the 2.5 percent from this end, top from the top end. So, if you subtract 2.5 percent, what are you left with? 97.5? So, this is going to be the value that the 97.5 percentile value. So, you cut off this 2.5. I also want to cut off these initial 2.5 percent. So, that means I can go 2.5 percent from here. What will this value be? 2.5 percentile. So, basically am I not simply taking the value that is at the 2.5 percentile and the value that is at 97.5 percentile. This is my lower bound. This is the lower bound and this is the upper bound. Everything in between this little bit like any these 2 values from everything that is in the middle will be more than this lower bound and will be left at this upper bound. Is this part clear to everyone? Any questions in this? So, I can simply use the NP dot percentile function. This is my original distribution. If I have 95 percent confidence. So, I am applying this formula 100 minus confidence interval that is 0.95 divided by 2. So, that means 0.5 divided by 2 or into 100. So, 95 will be a guy. So, 5 by 2, 2.5 percent and for the upper limit I am doing 100 minus this above value. So, if this was 2.5, so nothing but 100 minus 2.5 which is 97.5. So, I am simply finding the lower bound which is the 2.5 percentile and upper bound which is the 97.5 percentile which is going to be the same as this which is I will show you which is going to be the same as the formula that we have kind of discussed here. This one let us also implement this. So, let us take us this is the sample data. So, let me do a sample mean NP dot mean sample data. Next is standard error. Standard error we know that it is standard deviation divided by root n. So, I can say S E is equal to NP dot S T D. This will give me the standard deviation for sample data divided by NP dot square root. This will give me the square root of length of the sample data or n. Let us print sample mean plus 1.96 multiplied by S E. See roughly almost the same 3.67 that is here 3.68 we have rounded off 5.5 or 5.47 of the year which is again almost matching these 2 values. So, that is exactly what you are going to get. Either you use this or you use this method you are going to get the similar results. Is this clear? I think it is fairly straightforward. I will just calculate the mean. Standard error which is standard deviation divided by S E. It is where root of any which is the length of the sample data. Any questions anyone? Any doubts? If there are any questions please ask. So, I have again given notes here. You can read about it. Again standard deviation is kind of calculated. You can you know kind of read it. Code is again explained. Notes are given. Lastly, there is a case study which is related to Wal-Mart data set. You can take a look at home. Whatever we have studied it now it covers that. So, it kind of starts with data analysis like looking at the shape, numeral values, described visualization box plots and finally the main part which is this confidence interval calculating. So, lower limit we are finding upper limit for sales. Like how much money do men spend compared to how much money do women spend at Wal-Mart. So, this code application is clearly present. Alternate method is also shown which is the which we just discussed. Elf it at percent time but that is also there. So, once you revise today's class you should be able to attempt this. Then lastly you have a question that you want to attempt. You will have to attempt. Instead of 95 percent confidence apply in the CNP for 90 percent confidence. I have in the in the code I have shown for gender you will have to do for marital status and ACE groups. So, any questions folks, any questions anywhere? Once you attempt this you should be able to more grasp the CLT concept or sorry the confidence interval concept. Any questions anyone? Please please do solve this because this will be really helpful for understanding the code as well as the concept because this can come in your exam like calculate the confidence interval for a given data 95 percent confidence interval. In the question in the in the question you can expect either use this method or you can input at percentile formula. Both should be correct as long as you get the right answer. Is that clear? Is that clear yes or no? Any doubts? Any questions? Anybody? Cool. I will think that as no then this notebook also has the case study link. So, whenever you refer it you should get that. So, that is about confidence intervals. Now, let us look at one of the most important concepts in data science in general. This is also kind of in a way defensive beginning to your statistical learning or machine learning at your point. This is almost always the first algorithm that people study. Although not the first in Stanford and other University of Virginia, but we know that when it is in machine learning. Subsequent years. So, what we are going to do is it is 322. Let us take a 5 minute break. Try to grasp what we have studied in the last question please ask if anybody wants to have what the last room you can do that now and we will start in 5 minutes because it is the next topic I want to give a 5 minute break. So, we will start in 5 minutes it is 322 we will start at 327 in the meantime if anybody has any questions please feel free to ask. So, let us restart. Now, we are going to start looking into machine learning like the basics of it at least. Do you have any other course related to machine learning this semester? Okay. So, this is basically the start term starting for it may be next semester onwards. You should start having those courses. Like do you have electives or like is it mandatory? So, let us start with some basics. Let us say you work for a company called CAUSE 24. I think everybody is aware of what CAUSE 24 is right. Basel basically used CAUSE or second hand CAUSE. Now, you are working at as a data center that are machine learning engineer at CAUSE 24. Based on the basic of the both by as well as cell by as well as cell CAUSE. So, has anybody ever used CAUSE 24? Like does any of you are known? So, what happens? You have used it. So, what happens basically? You take your car or you use your vehicle to them and kind of do their inspection. They look at your vehicle, they have some inspection checks that they did. And they come up with a price that look we are going to kind of buy your vehicle at this price. Right. So, CAUSE 24 operates all over India and in fact, the expanded was a democracy is spreading. Now, is it possible for them to find out estimated price for every car that comes in India or wherever they are operating manually? Right. Every possible car that they get just by the sure their mechanics and their engineers would do those inspections. But based on those inspections, right. Let's say they check your age of the vehicle, right. What else they could check whether the car has any dens or scratches. What else? If I want to kind of know the status of the car, how many kilometers that the car has driven? So, on so forth, right. There could be multiple such checks that they might be doing. And based on all the assessments, they have to come up with a price, right. For this, you might need a pricing algorithm, right. So, based on these prices, based on these variables, you want to predict. You want to predict the price of the car, right. The price that advets you should buy the car, right. So, this is your goal. When you have to kind of predict the price or any continuous value, price continuous value, everybody agrees with that. Price can be 2 lakh rupees, 2.5 lakh rupees, 2.25 lakh rupees. So, price is a continuous variable. So, when you have to kind of predict the continuous vehicle, that type of problem is called a regression problem. So, this is a regression problem. But let us say on the other hand, you have to make a decision. Instead of the price, instead of the price, you have to make a decision whether to buy the car or not, whether to buy the car or not. How many possible answers to this question can be like to buy the car or not? Only to either buy yes or no. So, basically, when you have to kind of predict the chance you are getting the speed classes or discrete categories, that type of problem is known as classification. So, these are the two broad categories of problems that we will be dealing with regression and classification. And this whole process, either classification or regression, comes under the umbrella of supervised learning. Supervised learning means where you have the input variables as well as the output labels. Here I have the output labels, for example, how will I do that? I have will take historical data. Historically, cars 24 might have sold bunch of different cars, right? They would have feature 1, feature 2, feature 3. These features can be these only. Let us take three for example, now for simplicity. Age of the vehicle, they took into consideration age of the vehicle, they took into consideration whether there was a scratch or how many scratches were there and how many kilometers is the car driven. And then they had a corresponding price column. Based on these values, they had coded a price earlier, based on the subject matter expertise, x, y, z and the price that they had coded was e. So, they will take the historical data from the previous dealing that we have done. Now, in supervised learning, I have both input variables because these are going to be my input variables. So, the goal is to kind of input these data points, input these points and then output the algorithm should give me the price, which is the target label, which is the this value. So, I will take a historical setup historical data. I will train a model of this. I will tell the model that when the age of this scratch was this, kilometers was this, this was the price that they coded. On the other hand, let us say if the price was if the age was p, scratch was number of scratches were q and kilometers were r, this was the price, b was the price that they coded. So, I am going to teach the model, when this was the input, this is the output. Based on this model, we will set pattern, certain weights that we will see and based on that, we will try to predict the price. So, this process is known as a supervised learning, where you actually have the both inputs as well as the outputs. And at the test time, like when the model is fully trained, if any new input comes or if any new individual comes to sell their car, I can simply ask that check these values for that car, put it in this algorithm and expect this price output and you can simply tell it to that customer. Is that clear? That is the whole goal of supervising machine learning and learning regression in this case. Is that clear? Any questions anyone? Cool. Now, let us also look at, there can be multiple algorithms that can be used to this prediction. So, one such class of predictors or algorithms is called linear models. So, we will specifically look into linear regression. So, here the goal is to build a linear equation, a linear equation for price, a linear equation for price as a function of age, scratch and kilometers. It could be any variables, but for this example, I am making age, scratch and kilometers. What is the general equation for linear equation? What is the general form for linear equation? Anyone? A x plus b, y equal to A x plus b, right? So, this is the goal by where y is my output and x is going to be my input. So, that is exactly how we want to represent our this scenario. So, y is supposed to be my output, in this scenario what is supposed to be my output? What I am trying to predict? So, price will be my variable, so price. Now, what is going to be my x here? What is going to be my x here? What is the input that is going to the module? Sorry? Yes, so, there are going to be multiple values, age, scratch and kilometers. So, I can say that w1 multiplied by, so, A into x, right, A multiplied by x. So, let me say A1 multiplied by scratch, scratch is my first variable. plus A2 multiplied by age plus A3 multiplied by kilometers plus a constant b. So, this is how I am actually going to represent my linear regression equation. Then, the output variable of price is actually linear function, a straight line, a linear function of these three variables. There could be more than three also, there could be less than three also. Can I plot this on an x-wap line? Can I plot this on an x-wap line? Can I plot this on an x-wap line? Yes or no? Why, if yes, how will I plot it? What will come in y-axis? What will come on x-axis? So, the answer to the question is actually no. Because there is more than two dimensions, no, scratch represents one dimension, age represents one dimension, kilometers represents one dimension, price represents one dimension. So, let's assume I had only these two, price and scratch. Then, I would have x would be my scratch, like if there is a scratch, then what is the price? Like, if there would have been one more, let's say age, I could have plotted on a third very third axis age. But once the fourth axis comes, mathematically it is possible, but I cannot visualize it, visualize this because so much can only be determined. But mathematically, this is possible and that's what exactly happens also. So, once you have a two-dimensional, like if you have x and y, then this is called a line. But what if, what happens when I have a third dimension, then what do I call this object? plane, very good. Then I will have a plane, you might have started in your 12th class. Right, this is 2D, this is 3D. But when it goes beyond the third dimension, it's called a hyperplane. More than three dimensions, it's called a hyperplane. So, geometrically it will, it is possible to plot it, theoretically, but this will not be a hyperplane, but it will be linear in that dimension. Is that clear? What do I mean by linear? Basically, just like in two dimensions, it's in the straight line, in three, these will be straight kind of plane and it will not be curved. If it was two-dimensional, dimensions it could have been something like this or this would be a curved plane. So, this could be two-dimensional. Similarly, hyperplane could also be in non-linear, this is non-linear, this is non-linear. Similarly, we can have a non-linear hyperplane as well. But linear means straight. So, it's going to be a linear relation between the inputs and the output. That's an assumption of linear relation. Inputs are related to output in a linear fashion. Is this clear? This is a very basics of linear regression. Any question anyone here? Any question anyone? Cool. Let's start. So, this is the case study that we are going to look into. So, this is the cache 24 problem that we are kind of going to solve. So, we are decided that cache 24, you want to send like I showed an example of mine, but cache 24 was to send the down. So, you want to send the up to your cache and secondly, you want to basically automate the problem of the price pricing towards the price. You don't want your subject matter exports to manually do everything. So, you want to automate the process that the price is well. So, you will be given path in just, because we already discussed age of the car, number of kilometers driven, number of scratches there and out there. What is the order of the car? How many can use, let's say the address for the place any pass, renovate or any pass work done on the car, things like that. What is the engine quality, things like that? There can be multiple features that based on the subject matter expertise, we could leverage for predicting the price of the car. And these are OS predictors or features, for example, may model mileage, model meters, services speed. So, these are known as predictors or features. As we discussed, what do you think the nature of this problem is, we want to predict the price, clustering something, we will see later. Out of the two regression classification, what do you think is that problem it is? Regression, because we are trying to predict a continuous variable. Any questions? Cool. So, the goal of this is to kind of train the model, such that as I showed that you will put the input, you put the input mileage model, you put whatever into the MN model and you get the price of the car. So, that is the goal when you have a target in the training address called supervised, in the target where the place continues, called regression as we just saw. Any questions now? Any questions? I'm starting from very basics. So, this needs to be absolutely clear before moving forward. Any questions anyone? Cool. So, basics, again, as we always do, when we get the data set, before the basic libraries, we get the data set and we loaded using pd.rtscs. So, this is the data set that I have, I have the selling price. This is what I want to have prepared. This is from a cyber medium, but going forward, I would never have had a problem, then this will kind of be. We look at as soon as it relates, but when we have to have that, so it is kind of a relaxed way to be with bigger sectionally. You know, I would like to make my life engine, max power, each of the vehicle, which is bridge value, from what is the correct model, individual trust map dealer must be some kind of valuation that they do, whether it is actually a legator or not, whether it is diesel car, selector, get busy, but to all, I hope everybody can understand what does 0 and 1 mean here? What would 0 and 1 mean here? Sorry? No worries. So, diesel car, it is a petrol car. Is it manual or is automatic, 1 and 0 again? I think 5-seater or more than 5-seater? If it is 5, then 1, if it is more than 5, then it is again 1 here, 1 or 0. Cool. One more thing that we need to, I think we have discussed in the past, models, machine learning models in general cannot understand this. So, what type of stat is that we need to see in past, what is in the vehicle values? Encoding, right, in general. Now, what type of encoding should I use here? What type of encoding should I use? 1 or 10 coding, okay? The correct way should be to do 1 or 10 coding, but this is not actually going to go with it. Let us see. We will show you both, but I will show you the problem with 1 or 10 coding in this case. Also, one more thing, the scale of the values are very different, right? AX will be in the model, by using the ATN is in 786 like in triple digits. So, models like linear regression kind of have a problem when you have different scales. Let us see what is the problem. Let us say I have an equation y equal to A1X1 plus A2X2 plus B. If I increase the value from X1 to X1 plus 1, what should be the output? What should the impact on my y value? Sorry. Plus, so y could increase by A1 value, right? What if I increase the value of X2 by 1, then and y1 is, X1 is as it is, X1 is not changed, only X2 is increased this one this time. Then I can say that y will increase by A2. Now, how do you compare A1 and A2? Let us say if A1X1 is in kilometers and this is in number of years, right? Now, how can you say whether the impact of increasing one unit in X1 will be higher or lower than increasing the one unit in X2? We cannot compare because the units are different kilometers and years, right? For example, if it is a kilometer, right? Thousands of kilometers. A1 might be a very large value or basically, impact of increasing one might not be high in this case. Let us say for cars, we have 10,000 kilometers, if I increase by 1, 10,000 and 1 kilometer would then make a difference. But on the other hand, the difference is that cars are all four years old and I have increased the age by 1. That could have a significant difference because within one year you might have driven thousands of kilometers more. So, increasing the age by 1 year could have a different amount of impact, compared to increasing the kilometers by 1. So, different scales could have the problem in interpretation of the output. So, how do we solve for that? Yes. So, we try to bring them onto the same scale kilometers and years. So, we had discussed two processes in the past, standardization and normalization. So, it is very important to standardize or normalize your data when you are kind of dealing with linear regression algorithm because of this reason. There is one more reason for convergence, but I think that is not part of a course right now. We will not go into that. So, now coming on to the encoding part, you mentioned that we are going to use one order encoding. So, what happens in one order encoding? What happens in one order encoding? Let us say I have a make column here, make. This is Maruti, this is Hyundai, this is Audi, this is Kia, right. Let us say there are 40 plus mix, 40 plus different car makers. Now, what will happen in case of one order encoding? What will happen in case of one order encoding? We will have one order code, let us say Maruti. Yes. So, if I have to kind of represent in one order encoding fashion, I will have to create an array or a vector of what size? Number of makers, right. I will have a vector of let us say there are 40 makers. So, this will be a 40 vector, 40 units long vector and of ones and zeros. Maruti will be one, rest all will be zero. Similarly, for Hyundai, this will be zero and till 40. So, you see if I kind of convert this into one order encoded approach, I will have 40 plus new columns, 40 plus new columns. So, that means I am increasing the dimension as I discussed earlier. Let us say this will result in dimension one or feature one, feature two, feature three, feature four. So, I am increasing the dimensions. What do I mean my dimensions? In case of 2D, I could plot this, 3D, I could plot this, beyond this I had a hyperplane, four dimensional, five dimensional. So, this will have a 40 or 50 dimensional hyperplane and it is kind of difficult to manage this. So, this problem is also known as cursed of dimensionality because of these many unique values, these many unique categories which go to result in this much expansion of the columns. We will not go ahead with the one or 10 coding in this case. You see for model, I have 3000 plus unique values, 3000. So, I would have had if I had done one or 10 coding, I would have had 3000 more features. They are interpreting that would have been a very big challenge in case of a linear regression model. Same for make like 41 unique mix. So, using one or 10 coding will result in a lot of dimension, this is the one. So, some dimensionality, we can use another dimension for adding coding. What is target encoding? What is target encoding? That is not target encoding, that was level encoding. But here I will be dealing with probabilities. What other statistic can I replace with? Any thoughts? Can I use average selling price instead of probability? Let us say I have a make of Maruti, Maruti can have multiple columns. I can replace Maruti with the average selling price of Maruti as a target encoding. So, in case of classification where you have one to predict the chances or actual categories, yes or no, you can replace with probability of getting yes or probability of getting no. But here, when you have a continuous value, you can replace the average or median value of that target. Is that clear? So, we will do a replacing replacement as it is shown here. So, the I say, I say, I want to write 1.2 lakhs, but you can write 5.5 lakhs or so. So, I simply replace Maruti with 1.2, you can write 1.5 lakhs. I think it is a risk for some data as well. So, I can replace it with this. So, this is the code that I am going to use for make and we will do provide make selling price and simply transform it by mean. This will replace it with the mean values and similarly for model. We will see the code in action also, but this is going to be the code. Any questions here? Any doubts? Any doubts? Anyone here? Applying transform will directly do this operation. Instead of Maruti, we will have 1.2. Instead of Hyundai, I will have 5.5. Instead of this value, I will have 3. Whatever values that that that I have, the average of Hyundai, like the average of these 3 values, 5.5, 2. But whatever the value that Hyundai average has, it will be replaced with this, 3.3 year and 4 has an average of 5.7. So, I will replace this with 4.7. And this is done by this code. If this is any question, please ask. If not, similarly, just like I am doing for make, I will put model also. Cool. I think if something at this time, if you are in the lab, you will get one. How do you think we should have the last part of starting this in the weekend model? What will be the problem with label including? I could also try label including. If I do label including, that would also be a feasible approach. I am not expanding the columns. I am giving them labels. Yes. So, there is no order between the make. So, they will be putting the mic on with the right approach here. So, again implementation of the code. Now, if you see, make and model are kind of replaced with the average selling price of their respective makes and models. Cool. So, this is going to be the data. Lastly, as we discussed, scaling. So, we are going to do a minmax normalization here. Again, another example shown. After scaling, this is how it looks. And I am going to import a minmax scalar. I think we saw in the previous class from my scalar and not pre-processing, we import the minmax scalar and simply do a fit transform. So, when you do a fit transform, you see now every value is actually did used. It is between 0 and 1. So, the scaling is done. Minmax scaling as you might aware, it is 0 to 1. Let us also look at a few data notations. So, if you see, if you look at a data frame here, this data frame, it kind of resembles this structure. Next, let me take an example. Right, this data frame actually resembles this structure. We have test one after the FDM features and why is your target price? Similarly, from here, I can say this will be the features. And this is the target. Then there are n, n rows. So, this is known as number of samples, MORN. This is going to be number of samples, D is going to be number of features, and N is going to be number of classes. Here, we do not have n because we have a continuous notation. So, each of them can be represented listed in this fashion. Cool. Data notation is done. So, this is an important concept. Like, what is the goal of machine learning? So, the goal of machine learning is generalization. What do we understand by the word generalization? See, so, what I am going to do is, I am going to take this dataset. This one, separate out these values, the features with the target variable, and simply feed it into a machine learning model. And I will ask it to kind of, based on these features, the standard of parameters still, whatever value we have. Try and learn this pattern. You are trying to learn an equation that can give me the selling price. And then, when a new data point comes or when a new customer comes, I will give you these values for that vehicle. Use that equation to give me what should be the rights and price point. So, it should be the generalize model. It would be generalize solution. That means, whatever future case that might come, whatever output you give me, it should be fairly accurate. I can't expect you to get one at least, but it should be fairly accurate. So, build a general model that can be applicable in any case, and not to only specific cases. Now, what would be problem with that? Like, what would be opposite to generalization is kind of memorizing the problem. One of the problem that comes with machine learning is that it memorizes the data. For example, it will learn the exact patterns that is present in your dataset, the training dataset. And when a new data point comes, which is completely different, it might not be able to give you an accurate or generalize concept, because it did a role learning on the data. I will give you an analogy. Let's say, whatever I am teaching, let's say whatever quiz questions that I am kind of given you till date. Some students just learn those quiz and do not understand the concept. Now, in your exam, the same concept comes, but the same question does not come. It comes from the same concept. Do you think that student will be able to answer the question correctly? They have learned the answers of all, they have done the road learning of all the quizzes that I given you earlier. But in your exam, the question came, which is a based on the same concept, but a different question altogether, which has different values or different format altogether. Do you think, will that student be able to generalize their learnings on that question? Yes or no? No, because they did not actually learn the concept, they did not learn the pattern that was taught. Rather, they just learned the actual answers to the quiz. That's the same analogy, that's the same thing happens with machine learning. So, it is going to learn this dataset so well that it is always able to predict somewhere about these values only. It might not be able to generalize well on a unseen data point. So, that's the problem we need to solve and we need to build a general model that can handle any cases. Like for example, a student that you can say has a concept, so much so that we can try to answer any question in the exam because they have understood the concept. So, that's the goal of machine learning, its generalization. Assume that you have M data points, standing on its I-Code stem. You think, this is the input, this is our product predicted value, this is called a predicted value. Ideally, the predicted value should be very close to the original price. The actual pattern for example, the price was 2.2, the actual number of the predicted values which is very close to the actual value but not exactly the same as the actual value. So, it needs to be as close as this. If for M samples, if for a sample, your predicted values, the algorithm predicted values is almost equal to the algorithm of the truth value, the actual value is then you can say that it is a good model. But when you predict them in new sample, and goal is to predict value in new sample, but future translations. I just don't want it to go to learn that the sad training sample. I wanted to generalize on a new sample or a new data point that comes in future or a new customer that comes in the future because that's the whole point right? That's why I'm building a model so that in future whenever a new car comes, I can simply use this algorithm to get the right price. So, I go to predict value in new sample. So, how do we know that it is going to be put in the next predicted new sample? Can you even think? How will we know that it will be perform, it will perform well in the new sample? New sample has not come yet, it will come in future. So, how do we know before hand that it is an input model? Is the problem cleared to everyone? How do I figure out? How do I know before hand and body that's full? Any thoughts? As I will think even in analogy, I have, I want to teach you concepts, right? How do I know at the end that you have learned the concepts? How do I know that my classes were successful? I test you, right? So, basically I teach you, I can in class I give you a number of questions in the quiz, but in the test I give you a completely different questions, right? Which will be on the same concept, but completely different that you have not seen till late. So, that's the same thing that we're going to do with the machine learning model. And so, this is the dataset that I have, how many rows do I have? So, I have around 19,000 data points, 20,000 per fee. So, I'm going to divide this dataset into three separate parts. So, I'm going to divide this whole dataset into three separate parts, called train, validation and test. This is the part that I will show the model. This is the dataset that I will use to train the model or basically make it learn the pattern of one. Generally, models have a few parameters, right, or called hyper parameters. There are some parameters or hyper parameters in the model that we want to update. We will look into that. So, the best set of those hyper parameters are determined using the validation dataset. And finally, when I have the complete model regime, when I have the complete model regime, I'm going to test it on the dataset, which the model has never seen before. These data points, the model has never seen before. I'm going to make predictions for this dataset and see how close my predicted values are. That's how I'm going to tell whether the model was actually good or not. So, basically, I'll let you answer the questions from the unseen quiz or exam that we're going to have. Then I'm going to evaluate it again the actual answer key for that questions and see how good you have actually performed, right. If it's a match, then you have done well. If it's a close match, then also you have done well. But if it's completely operated, like the answer was let's say C and given a completely random answer, then that means that you have not done that well. So, that's the whole goal. So, the solution here is, we're going to divide the dataset into parts to what they generally in the second to three. But for now, it's going to say that you will divide the two parts. One is going to be able to do it for testing. When you see the translation by the logic in the next semester, but for understanding the goal, you've got to understand that you will divide the parts. One part is the silicon part and one will learn. You'll just get a better idea. So, this will be used for training the model and this will be promising for an engine data or you will be used for testing it. Now, once if you are able to perform well in the quiz and in the end-time exam, I can be confident that in future when you work for a company, you will be able to work well as a data scientist or a data analyst. So, my quiz or my exam is a proxy of how well you will do outside the class. So, that's the same goal. This is a proxy of how well the model will go outside the model space. So, again the goal is to check the predicted values that actually very close to the ground truth. This is for evaluating. Right. Now, how will we do that? First, it's kind of we're going to split the dataset. So, what it does is, what is function does is, train test split, if this is my dataset, it is going to kind of divide the dataset into two parts. This will be train and this will be test. Now, it could be 80 percent, 20 percent, like I could take 80, 20, 80 percent, 80 percent, 20 percent here. I can take 70 percent, 30 percent, whatever. Most amount of point, more amount of point should go in training them testing. So, X train, X test, evaluate, X train is basically, X is not the input features, evaluate, evaluate, evaluate. So, imagine train, exactly, evaluate, X train, evaluate, test will be H, just like that. Now, this function train test split, divide the dataset into two parts, X comma, Y, X is your input, Y is your input, S sign is point, you get at least 30 percent of your training input, 30 percent of your whole data should go into S set. That means, training will be 70 percent, random set is same as the random scene, that every time you will run this, give me the same split. Okay, now, can you answer this question, when do you think I should do this splitting? When should I do this splitting? Before I pre-processed the data or after I pre-processed the data, pre-processing is the scaling, scaling and category encoding. Why, why, why after? Sorry? So, we should do after the splitting, basically, are you seeing after? Okay, she is saying basically I should first pre-processed then do this split. But, do you think there is a, don't you think there is a problem with that? What is the test set supposed to do? It is supposed to be a proxy of something that is coming in future, right? So, technically that event does not happen yet. But, when standardization or when max, you are doing mean minus x minus max, right? What if the max is actually part of the test dataset? That means, you have peaked into the future. In reality, can we look at the future? No, right? So, this problem is only leakage. You don't want to eat any point, any information, it will get a lot. So, that is to be completely isolated set. So, a good practice is always to kind of split before doing the pre-processing. I am not done here, but ideally, right? To avoid leakage, it is always better to kind of watch what I say and then do the pre-processing. Is that clear? Any questions, anybody? Any doubts? I will take a two minute pause here. Is anybody has any questions? Cool. If no questions, then we are going to do a 70-30 split. The size is going to be 0.3% training will be 70%. Any doubts in this interface? I think it is straightforward. One line, we would have only checked from a library, excuse me, we would not be able to get you. And then you could have applied and said, this parameter, be afraid, be out of text. Now, your DF train will have all the training inputs and DF tests will have all your testing inputs. Next, again, I am doing this whole process, which I have done earlier also. I have done encoding everything here, but I am doing it again after splitting, basically, to show you that we should not leak the data center. So, this again, the same thing transform and everything is happening again. Let us also check null values. Now, linear regression cannot handle null values. So, like, for example, model make these are missing values, right? So, we need to do an imputation. I am simply going to do a mean imputation here. I am going to find the global mean and do a fill in it. I think we are seeing this in the past when we were doing imputing. So, what another, there was one more function that I had used, for imputation. Apart from failure, there was one more function that could have had to be used. What was that? There was one more function that we had used in the past. It came from a scalar and a p processing, if you remember. Who said that? Simple imputed, yes. And what would have been the strategy? If I am going to dot me here, what would have been the strategy parameter? Mean, I would have simply said the mean, start when you mean, then I would have done the fit transform. So, this gives the same result as the fill, finally, you can do this or you can do simple imputed. Both are fine. Then I am doing the scaling again, mean max scaling as we saw in the past. Finally, I am dividing the data into two parts, train basically x and y. X is going to be all my input features and y is going to be just now. Here you see, y is selling price, that means you are not going to get up. So, I divide my data set into two parts. Training data into two parts, here you see. All these are x's. This will be my x and this is my y. So, I am dividing it into x and y. X is going to be my input and y is going to be my output. So, here you see, x train is deft end or drop selling price. I am dropping the selling price, dropping the data in the input. Then giving this off to 60, what I am going to do? And y is the selling price which is the value of x and y. And dividing it into x and y. Similarly, I will do it for the test. X test and y test. Now, we have the data set ready and we can simply feed it into the model. If you remember, I taught you that linear regression is something like this, like this equation. Right? The good thing is you do only two kind of right core point. You have the function ready. You just need to input that model, that data into the model. Intuition as thing I have explained it to you earlier. So, you can read this as the notation, like the theory as well. Right? So, what am I going to do? I am going to simply impute the model. Sorry, impute the model. Import the model. Scale out the linear model. So, as I mentioned, I mean a scale I can apply as all the functions of machine learning. To read your model is the magnitude of the linear model. From a scale out not linear model, I am going to import linear regression. And I am going to use the fit function. Fit is nothing but equate into apply. Or feed in the input. So, see I am giving x-trained and y-trained. Right? So, for here I am just giving one single variable. You can change it to multiple which you will see. So, this is how you simple build the model. So, you can say the model has been trained. You do not need to do anything apart from these three steps for training the model. Now, let us also look at one more thing. One notation I had missed. These A1s, A2s, these are known as coefficients. Coefficient of the model. And this is known as the intercept. B is known as the intercept. So, one intercept is just B. And whenever you have more than one variable, like you have landing in three or two kilometers and years. This is known as a multi-variate linear regression. And when you just have one, let us say y equal to Ax plus B, this is known as univariate because you have a single variable. When I have just this, how many coefficients do I have? How many coefficients do I have? One, how many intercept do I have? So, collectively these are known as parameters of the model, parameters. Whatever this, how many coefficients do I have? And how many intercept? Total how many parameters? 2 plus 1, 3. So, that is how you identify number of parameters. Now, in the coefficients plus the intercept. And it is not going to be one. So, coefficients plus intercept is collectively known as my parameters of the model. Cool, any confusion still now? Any doubts? Training the model or writing the code is fairly straightforward. You will see any code the model and the fit code. So, I have only the univariate analysis just to show one variable. So, you see I have taken only one in the model. This was my X-trained. Right? If I just take the model, so I am feeding only one variable into the model. You see, I am calling it X-1 train just by taking the one column and feeding only X-1 train and Y-trained. That means, I am creating what kind of equation I am saying price is equal to? A multiplied by model plus B. As an obviously machine learning, what is machine learning actually? What is your machine learning? If it is this time you created this equation, create this equation, what is the actual learning that is happening? What is it learning? Price is given to you, model is given to you. What is actually the model learning? What are we learning here? Do we know? What are we learning here? Is model given to us? Is price given to us? Is A and B given to us? This is what the model learns. What should be the right parameters that it should create here? For example, let me plot this data point. Let's say this is my input kilometers and this is my price. Let's say this is my model only. If this is the model, then this is the price. If this is the model, this is the price. If this is the model, then this is the price. So on and so forth. I have plotted all right. How do I read this? If this is the model, M x, then this is the corresponding price. Now, y equal to M x plus c should be a straight line. Now, there can be multiple straight lines. This is also straight line. This is also straight line. This is also straight line. This is also straight line. This is also straight line. Let's say an example. Which straight line do you think should be more accurate this? Or this dotted line? Which one is more accurate representation of the model? So, how will I infer it? If I let's say a model M, I will feed into this line and I will get the corresponding price. So, this is P1 like the blue point. And this is the price that I get from the second line, P2. Which line do you think is more accurate? This one dotted one or the hard-booted one like the straight one. Why? Sorry? On some more lines. Yes. So, the line passes more closely to the actually data points. This is far away like it just passes from my these two data points. This is all the kind of far away from this line. So, this is a more accurate line. And this will have an equation y equal to A1 x1, A1 x plus B1. This will have A2 x plus B, right? B2. Now, which A is and B is to pick? How does a model reach this position? This is actually what the machine is actually learning. What should be the right side of parameters? What should be the value of A and B that it should pick? So that you kind of get this line. There is a comprehensive theory behind it. How it does that? But it's kind of beyond this limits of this course. Very detailed mathematics are involved. I have all the mathematics that you might have studied in your class 12 and even engineering mathematics. We're going to skip that for now. But this is the goal for the machine learning model. It's actually learning these parameters. So, how do I access these parameters? Coefficient can be accessed using .cof underscore parameter. This will give you the position that you want to make. And you can use the function. You need to set this point to 0.012. So that means what is the equation? What is the equation for price and model? What is the value of A and B? A is actually 0.998 and B is actually 0.0012. So now in future, so my equation is this. Price is equal to 0.998 times model plus 0.0012. In future, if a new car comes, I can just put in their model values and get the price equation, price value. Whatever model value that there is, I can put it and get the price value. So that's how my linear equation works, right? This is one simple case that I used to explain model in reality. We will use much more features as we will see now also. This is simple univariate regression because I'm passing one single model. So you see it's a good predictor. Model low is a good predictor. See it's passing through very close to the most of the data points. Multivariate is where I feed the entire data. Explain it in vitrate. No, no. Why do I see so many coefficients? Why do I see so many coefficients? Because I have increased the number of parameters. How many coefficients will I have? 16 coefficients. Why? Because there are 16 columns in the data set. So these will be 16 per coefficients and one intercept. Now you see, after feeding the whole model, like the whole data, the value of intercept is actually changed. It's 0.112 now. Earlier it was 0.012. So depending upon the data set, everything changes. So if you expand the data, your intercept will also change. After feeding the whole data, these are your weights, our coefficients and this is what you're interested in. Is this clear? Any questions, any doubts, anyone? I know this is comprehensive and I want to put me in a question to overvalidate. So I have to write it in a way. Some pause here. I'm not going to take it forward. We'll discuss in the next class about the evaluation metric. How are we actually going to evaluate this model? Is this model good? What is a quantitative value measure? What is one mathematical form or multiple mathematical functions? That I have to evaluate or measure the performance of my model. This one was the evaluation process, which we'll do in the next class. So I'll take a pause here. If anyone has any doubts, please ask. Or else we can go towards the attendance. Anybody has any questions? Cool. So that's about it. Again, we have learned about the intuition behind the integration, but not many mathematics of it, as it is beyond the scope of this course. But if you're interested in learning more about it, I would advise you to watch this playlist by Stanford. CS229. This is the course for entire machine learning, but for now you can get started with the linear models, like the first lecture, the second. And second would be, again, the content taught here might not be relevant for this course, but it is very useful for teachers from scratch, including the mathematics of it, like the mathematical explanation of whatever happens in machine learning. In general, very good for your career. If you want to build careers at top-to-companies like Amazon, family, available company, there's a high-tech, available engineers, top-ear tech startups. Very good course, but beyond the scope of this course, definitely. And again, you might not be able to grasp it in one go, you'll have to watch it three, four times to understand it. Cool. So this is Stanford Online CS229. So this is what the teacher Stanford said. The good folks at Stanford kind of make it online as well. The whole course. Cool. Any questions? Will we get all classes, short notes for revision? So minus if you take a look at the notebooks that I have provided to of the class, the plenty of techs written in that, plenty of notes written there. You can refer to those directly, but I'll still give one simple sheet, which has some important pointers and important functions. And if you practice questions as well, I'll try to do it by today, end of the day. Any other questions? Anyone? Any other questions? Cool. If you have no questions, then let's move to the attendance. Let me also in the class. you