you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you In the next class, we'll have numericals as well as codes on deadlocks. But today's focus is going to be on understanding a advanced synchronization and deadlocks. Now, before we move on to this and discuss what all we've been seeing today, we'll move on to the recap of the previous class that we had. In the last class that we had together, we saw that when multiple threads were accessing the same shared data, the final result was becoming wrong. It was unpredictable. Why was it happening multiple reasons? I'm sharing data. Preemption can happen. Race condition can happen. Update can be lost. And we saw this problem. How by using synchronized keyword, we gave it a new text lock. Like if we add a subparacter problem, the shared resource here was the count dot value, which means one attribute of the object. Critical section was the plus plus and minus minus operations. And the lock was available with the object itself. Now, we also discussed briefly how synchronized will work only when the threads are sharing a lock, which means that they are working on one single object only. So, we fixed it by making sure that in the critical section, only one thread can enter at a point. It can do whatever it wants to to the shared resource. And the other thread is supposed to wait. When the job of the first thread is over, the second thread can restart. Okay. So, as of now, do you see that it is all about protecting the data? How to update it properly? Okay. But did we control the order in any way? If you remember, even when I was having multiple threads and I could protect the data, I was not able to control the order. And that is why when we were getting the correct outputs, the sequence might have changed. If you remember, the wallet example, in the wallet example, there were two threads, course and book payment. If the wallet was 1000 and the course payment was 700, book payments was 500. These are two threads. Now, the order could have been that first course payment runs and then book payment runs. Or first book payment runs and then course payment runs. And we said that both these orders are correct because by the end of the day, I am getting a valid answer. Yes or no? This is what we discussed. And that was making our environment safe and the threads were finally working in coordination. Okay. But tell me, is it good enough? If this kind of unpredictable leads to good enough, in some cases, yes, but not always. Okay. So in today's class, we will go one step ahead and see how the siliconized keyword cannot just protect the data but can also talk about protecting data or other, I can say, fixing the order of how the threads are executing. Up until now, we always said the scheduler decides in which order the threads are going to run. Okay. But sometimes you as a programmer might also want to control which thread runs first, which thread weights. And that is what today's class is all about. Okay. So in the previous class, what we learned was known as object level log. Okay. The log is available with one single object and threads were sharing the same object hence sharing the same log. In today's class, we will talk about class level logs. Then we will come to a very important topic known as CMA4. Okay. And there are two variants of CMA4. One is binary CMA4. Other is the counting CMA4. We'll talk about that. Then we will discuss a lot of problems which can be solved with the help of CMA4. Okay. We'll see how the ordering of threads can be maintained. We will discuss about a very important problem known as producer consumer. And then we will solve a practical example also controlling my threads. Okay. Then the second half of the class will be about deadlock. What is deadlock? What causes deadlocks? How to avoid deadlocks? Okay. And then we'll have like these two examples are something which we had in the previous class also. So I will give you an assignment too. You can try and solve using the class log instead of object log like we did in the previous class. Is that clear everyone? Any problem as of now? Okay. Great. So I'm hoping everyone is familiar with the object level logs. Right. You know what was an object level log. Yes. See this particular function. When we write synchronized in a non-starting method, do you guys agree that this is non-starting method? If you want to understand this better, you can open the code we had in the previous class of the orders of practical problem. And see that it is a non-starting method. Right. You all know that there are static methods like static variables, non-static variables and methods. Do you know the difference between the two? Start taking non-starting? No. Okay. So suppose I write a class over here. Okay. And in this, some random class, and in this I create a value. Okay. As of now, you can see I did not use the word static in front of it. Okay. Now if I create object 1 and object 2 of this class A, how will they look at the value? Can I say even though this value available right now is a shared value because it is available with my class A, both object 1 will and the object 2 will have a copy of value. Yes or no? That is how objects work. Right. Whenever we have any attribute in a class and we create an object of the class, the objects will have copies of the attributes. Yes or no? Because agree or not. Okay. But what if when I actually want to share the value across no matter what object I create? Okay. In this case, I will have to write something like class A static in A. Okay. Now, I at least I hope you all know what is global and local like global local variable. Okay. So static is similar to global, not exactly global, but it is similar. Okay. Now what happens that when I have this value, it means it creates some space over here. Just a moment. Okay. So now when I create object 1 and object 2, okay. And I am saying that these objects are of class A and they want to access a value. Okay. Now again, the only difference between these two is that this is a normal non-static value. This is a static value. So here what happens in the memory that object 1 is referring to value, which is available in its own copy. Object 2 is referring to its own value available in copy. Whereas in the static case, object 1 and object 2 both are referring to the value variable, because this value variable belongs to the class itself and not the different different objects that we are creating. Okay. So at this moment, no matter if object 1 or object 2 is making any changes, both will reflect in the common value. Is that clear everyone? What is static? Okay. So which means that even if I don't create objects of this class, I will still be able to access the value variable. Okay. Similarly, functions also. Okay. Functions can also be static and non-static. We will discuss that in detail later. Okay. Remember both static attributes, that is the static variables and the static methods belong to the class and not to a particular object. And you will move on to low level design and high level design. You will discuss that in much more detail when to make the class, that when to make the method start, they went to make variable start. Okay. So right now, previously I was saying that I am locking the object. Okay. I'm locking the object. Log is specific to that object. If you create another object, I will not be sharing data of the same object. Hence, I'm not sharing the same law also. Okay. But, is that always the case? Is that what you want always? No. You might want to move to class level long there. Okay. So remember when I'm writing this and I write, still can I use to wide increment value plus plus? It at this moment, what are you locking? Are you locking the method increment? No. You are just saying that this method increment is critical section. But what are you locking? You are locking the object which was created from the class in which this method was available. Does that make sense? Okay. So the object log does not log methods. It does not log values. Rather, it logs the current object on which the method can be called. Okay. Any doubt at the moment? Okay. So at this moment, suppose I create two objects. Okay. Suppose I say, rather, let us answer this only. This is the counter object right now. Counter counter is equal to new counter and we have created a new object. Okay. Now two threads call this, the incrementer thread is calling this. Suppose this is also increment thread. This is also calling it. Okay. So I can say counter dot increment counter dot increment. Both happens on the exact same object. Yes. On both are calling. Right. The synchronized method on the same object. But at this time, can I say whichever thread enters it first will lock it immediately. If thread one enters, it should lock it. Okay. So before moving on to this, let us see over this only. Okay. So suppose this is one single object. Thread one enters. Thread one has locked this. What will thread two do? Thread two is going to wait. It has no other job, but it will simply wait. The moment thread one completes its job, thread two will automatically enter. Okay. It does not have to constantly go and keep checking. Is the lock available? Is the lock available? Is that clear everyone? So thread one locks and then releases. And again, this has one single lock. But if I have created two separate objects like this, right now C1, C2 are separate objects, which means C1 has one lock. C2 has another lock. Okay. And both the threads are working on independent objects, hence independent locks. Independent locks. Okay. So when I am using different different locks, can I even synchronize? No. Both the threads are working on different objects. And hence they can run at the same time. Yes or no? Okay. So, synchronization solution which we learnt in the previous class will only work when I have one single object. Okay. It will not work when you have different different objects. Is that clear everyone? Any doubt as of now? Any doubt? Think about it and tell me. Okay. I just one more thing. I told you about two things, synchronized method. Right? Unsynchronized block. Yes or no? Yes. One was synchronized method. In which we would lock the entire method like this. And the other one was synchronized block. In which I could go inside a method and lock some particular piece of code. Is that clear everyone? Yes. I hope you remember this. Yes or no? Okay. Great. Okay. So these are object levels. Now it is not locking variable. It locks the current object. Every object has its own lock. Now think about it. What can be a common mistake? What you can do over here? First of all is definitely creating two separate objects. Right? And then trying to place a lock on that. What is the other problem which you feel like can happen? Tell me. What is the other problem which you feel like can happen? No, not that in coding. So suppose I write this class count. Okay. And this has a value. Okay. Then I have class payment. Okay. Payment is a task and it is going to implement runable. Okay. I am not writing the complete syntax. Then you have the run method. Inside the run method if you remember, I was running from one all the way till 10,000. And here I was doing count dot value plus plus. This is what we have seen in the previous class. The address of the problem. Now I have two questions for you. First of all, that if I was using this as synchronized block, where will I apply the synchronized block? If I want to apply as synchronized block, where will I apply it? What is the critical section over here? Count plus plus or the count dot value plus plus. This is the critical section. By right, synchronized the count object. And I would do this. This would have been correct. Okay. But if I ask you to now go ahead and implement the same thing, but instead of having a block, you are supposed to have a synchronized method. Now tell me, if I want to have a synchronized method, which method over here can be synchronized? Can synchronized run? Think about it. Can be synchronized run? We can definitely write synchronized. Okay. But would that be correct? Would that be correct? No, why? No, but look, if you think about it in synchronized run, I am running this whole thing. I am running a thread 10,000 times incrementing value. And I am seeing this whole thing is the critical section. Technically, this is my critical section. Right. And I am writing, so synchronized run. Is this correct? Say something. Or would it be needed to not close the next level? No, technically I can make an entire method synchronized. It might not be the most efficient thing out there, but I can do it. Okay. So syntax wise, it is fun. There is no issue over there. But whose log am I creating at the moment? Hmm? No, no, I am creating an object log only, because it is our non-starting method. Non-starting method automatically says it is an object log. Whose log am I creating? Will I write? Synchronized run. Whose log am I creating? Hmm? Try to move to the right direction by thinking. Logs belongs to what? An object? Right. Now if I am using run, to which object does this run belong to? Does it belong to count? Does run belong to count? Yes or no? Are they a very simple thing? I have written the class count. Tell me, does the run function belong to count? No. To whom does it belong to? Run belongs to the runnable task. Okay. So right now if I write synchronized run on whose object am I placing the log? I am placing the log on runnable's object, which means the payment class object I am trying to place a log. Right? But what value was I trying to protect? Was I trying to protect the value is in payment? No. I am trying to protect count. Right? I am trying to protect the values available in the count. So this method over here is going to be incorrect. And currently I am not synchronizing anything. This kind of code will never give you error. And you will not be able to find out what is the problem over here. Why am I getting the wrong data? Okay. So what was the correct way that inside that count, you would have to write a method. Okay. You will make that method synchronize. And here you can update the value. Okay. So this was another mistake which a lot of people do that instead of creating the method of class in which the value belongs to synchronize, they go ahead and directly make runs synchronized. Assuming that run is where the critical section is there, the value is being touched over here. Okay. Is a difference clear now? Any doubt at this point? Always create the object of the class. Okay. And for that object only, go ahead and create the log as well. Okay. If you are creating log of two different objects, if you are creating log of a different function altogether, which does not even belong to our class, it will not synchronize anything. Is it clear everyone, any doubt over here? Please ask in case you have any doubts. Or did you even understand this? Is it clear? Okay. Perfect. If this is clear, please go ahead and answer the next question. This is an example of what I wrote. Okay. Great everyone. Please notice how the log is being applied to the current object. Okay. Whatever object that you are going to create for this counter class, to that object, the log will be applied. Okay. And what is the critical section right now? This is the critical section. And this synchronize provides the log. Okay. And then log belongs to the counter object only. Whereas in this example, if you see over here, this log will belong to the runnable object, which is incorrect. Okay. And so the next one. Okay. I just one more thing. Do you all know what is a lambda expression? Do you all know what is a lambda expression? A great idea. So what have you used a lambda expression for? For these comparators, you must have used lambda to shorten it. Similarly, we can use lambda to shorten the syntax of calling functions also. Okay. You must have noticed that I want to create an object. Inside that object, we used to write a function. Okay. That whole statement we have been seeing in the past classes. So instead of writing the complete thing, you can give the lambda expression also. Okay. I will see you how to do this in code as well. But this right now says that thread one is going to execute the object C1 and the function that runs is increment. Okay. How to write this? We will see in a bit. But as of now, I hope this makes sense. Thread is going to run the C1 object, which calls the function increment. Same here also, thread T2 runs the C2 object and runs the function increment. Okay. Keeping this thing in mind, please answer the next question. Pretty easy, I believe. Okay. Please notice that this object will have its own lock. This object has its own lock because these are two different objects. Right now, when I am seeing C1 is being implemented in thread one, C2 is being implemented in thread two. Both are using different, different locks. Only when I would have had C1 dot increment over here, this would mean that I am using the same lock right now. But as of now, these are two different locks. Please remember, it is very, very essential. Okay. And synchronization only works when two threads or multiple threads are fighting for one single lock itself. If you have multiple locks, there is no point of using it. Okay. Next, we will move on to class level lock. Okay. Now, you all know that static functions or static variables belong to classes. They don't belong to specific objects. Okay. So for non-static synchronized, we were using object lock. Okay. But right now, when I want to have a static method, okay. And I want to lock that. I'll have to use a class lock. That is what will be applicable over there. Is that clear, everyone? Okay. Remember, whenever value method is static, it does not belong to any object. Okay. It belongs to the class itself. And one common value will be shared by all. And whenever I want to access something, suppose I have written this class counter, see, I have a static value. I want to access this value. How will I write it? Counter. Dot value. Okay. The moment I write this, this means access the value attribute available in my counter class. There is no need to create an object. Is that clear? Okay. Same if you see the wide method, the increment method is also static in nature. Okay. So as it is static, it belongs to class. Okay. So, um, tell me that what can I do here? And what can be the use case of these things? What can the use case of this thing? Use cases again, data sharing itself. Okay. Data sharing and updates happen immediately on the same value itself. Okay. Better visibility to everyone. Okay. Now, as we have seen, that friends over here are working. On the function, which is static in nature, we'll have to use the class name dot the function name to use this function. So counter dot increments is going to call this function for thread one. And counter dot increment for thread two will again call this function. Okay. And where is the lock available? Lock is available with the class itself. Okay. So right now whichever thread enters first, let us say thread one enters first. The thread one takes the lock. It is going to update the value when it exits it. It will release the lock and then thread two enters works in pretty much the same way. The only difference is that I don't have to create objects right now. Is that clear? Everyone? Is that clear? Any doubt? Okay. So again, even if you go ahead and create objects of the class, as of now you see my class is not started. The attribute and the functions are started, which means that I can create objects of this class. Yes or no? Okay. I can create objects. So if I can create objects and I have applied a class lock, this means now no matter how many objects you go ahead and create, I can still access the same lock. And again, solve the synchronization problem. Right? So in this case, you are able to absorb that in the previous case, I have to be particular that I will be using the same object yourself. Here you don't have to worry about it. Create any number of objects that you want to, but because the lock is safe guarding the class completely, you can do whatever you want. Okay. Is this clear? Everyone? Object level of protects object data. Class level of protects all the class or static data. Any issue at this point? Any issue? Let us understand this with a simple example. Static variables are like a common notebook, which is available to everyone. So this is a class level lock applied at the teacher's table. Okay. Who owns the notebook? The teacher owns the notebook. Okay. And all the students here are the objects and they want to write in this notebook. Can they do that? Yes, obviously they can do that. Okay. But the locking mechanism is available with who? With the class itself. Okay. Class decides who enters, who exits. Okay. Is this clear? Everyone? Any doubt at the moment? Just look at the image and tell me if you have any questions at this point. Okay. Code if you notice it is the exact same code which we have done in the previous class. Nothing has changed over here. Okay. The only difference is that now instead of having int value equal to 0, I am having static value equal to 0. And the increment method which I had is also static in nature. And that is what I am making synchronized. Okay. And everything else remains the same instead of creating an object count of this counter, I am simply accessing the method by writing the class name dot the method name. Okay. Same class name dot the value. And I can access all the data of the static variables and methods. Is it clear? You all can observe no object has been created. Static variable is still being shared. So the class is protecting it. Clear everyone any problem. Please look at the image once and see if you have any issues. Now why don't we need objects? Why are you both so late? Why do you do it? I hope you all get noticed that I don't even need object creation as of now because the directly I can access anything available with the class name. Okay. That is the major difference between class log and object log. So going forward you can decide which log to use and when do you want to use? Okay. Okay. Clear everyone any issues please tell me this go over the content till now and tell me if you have any problems. Yes. Okay. You can create it but for accessing attributes though you don't have to. Like in the normal variables you must have noticed until unless you create an object you cannot really access the attribute. It gives you error that this attribute belong to a class and object has to be created. But in this one we won't have to. Okay. Even if you do no issues. Done. Okay. Yeah. I'm in. Okay. Any doubt anyone any questions. Have you by any chance discussed deep copy and shallow copy in DSA? So it is pretty much the same concept. Now if you notice over here start it is what? It's a shallow copy people are accessing the same thing. Okay. Relate that is not exactly the same thing but you can relate to it. Okay. Objects can be created but they will refer to the same thing. Okay. Okay. Shall I launch one quiz now or are you still going through? Pressure yes when you are ready for the quiz. Okay. Please answer. Okay. Great. Okay. So the log is going to belong to the counter class. Okay. And it protects all the data presented inside it. Okay. Now up till now are you all able to notice that I can send only one thread to the critical section. But don't you feel like you should have more control. You should be able to send more thread to the critical section so that everyone can work. Okay. So this brings us to the next thing. Up till now soon foundation offered that only one thread can enter at a time. Everyone else is supposed to wait. But now what if I have such a scenario that there is one loop or one room in which I want maximum three people to enter or maximum four people to enter. Okay. And then I can move on. According to what additional concept what will happen? Even I have a capacity of three. One person will enter others will wait. One person will enter others will wait. This is going to happen. Okay. But we want to work control now and say that only three students enter at a time and the rest all will be waiting. Is that clear everyone? Okay. So this is the use case and for this use case the solution is going to be SEMA force. Okay. SEMA force are integer based synthesization tool that maintains a fixed number of permits to control how many threads can now enter your critical section at the same time. Is that clear? So SEMA 4 is nothing but like a counter to the permits that you have. Okay. So before we move on to this please answer the first question. Okay. It I can say permits only one thread at a time. Okay. That was the issue over here. So moving on to SEMA 4. Let us see this diagram. So see SEMA 4 is nothing. It's a simple counter based system. Okay. If permit is available then any thread can enter. If permit is not available the threads will be. So right here if you see total permits how many are available three permits are available. Remember these permits will always be integer base which means 0123. Okay. It cannot be a floating point. Okay. So right now three permits are available. So three threads can enter and how are they going to enter first thread enters. Okay. If first thread is going to enter it takes the permit with the help of the acquire function that you see over here. Okay. Acquire function takes you the gives you the permit and you see how total permits have been reduced to two. Once the job is done they are going to release the permit back to the SEMA 4. So that the total permits can again become three. Okay. So remember because these are counters right now three permits are available. If one takes it two permits are available. If another thread comes takes one permit one permit is available. Another thread comes take permits and zero permits are available. So if any SEMA 4 has the number 0 it means that now no more permits are available you will have to wait. Okay. Acquire function means take the permit or how many take one permit release means return the permit back. Okay. Is that clear everyone? Okay. So if I write SEMA 4 SEMA 4 is going to be the class which we will be using. SEMA 4 since MS the object of the SEMA 4 new SEMA 4 3. It means I have three permits available. Three threads can now enter. Okay. Okay. By default again remember zero always means that there are no permits available and you will need to wait. Is that clear? Any questions at this point? Yes. Okay. Please answer the next quiz. You can see how SEMA 4 is a combination of permit counter and waiting queue and it is providing you more control over who enters and how many entrance rather. And so the next quiz. Okay. Great. Okay. So what happens when a thread calls acquire it is going to take a permit or request for a permit. Okay. Next you almost have seen that we were having using the throws exception line in our previous course but we said that we will not be discussing it as of now. So now let us move on to try catch blocks. Okay. And rather this is the concept of exception handling. Okay. Now tell me what is an exception. Tell me what is an exception. In normal real life what is an exception? Okay. English. Normal English tell me what is exception. Correct. Both are correct. Something unexpected happening is exception. Right. Something exceptional happened out of the box happened. Okay. Can I say whenever we are running programs some exceptional things might happen. Okay. Now take an example of real life you are waiting in the queue. Okay. You are waiting in the queue but suddenly someone comes and asks you to leave the queue. Completely possible. So can I say your normal flow which was waiting in the queue and entering somewhere that has been disrupted. Yes or no. But this kind of disturbance caused in your normal routine is known as an exception. And the exact same thing happens with threads also. That threads are doing something they might be waiting in the waiting queue and because of some interrupt which has happened or some exception that has happened they will have to exit the waiting queue. Yes or no. Can happen. Okay. Now when we will write the code for this you will see one line thread dot sleep. Okay. So up until now you must have noticed if this was the CPU. Okay. And I was having thread one thread two and three so on. Okay. Up till now what happens that suppose T1 comes enters the CPU does it task and goes out. T2 comes enters the CPU does it task and goes out this is what is happening. Okay. But sometimes you must have noticed that these threads are very very fast and you might want to observe some of the less output. Okay. So in this case you might want the thread to wait inside the CPU itself. Okay. That okay you are doing your task that is fine. Or that instead of saying this wait let us call this pause. Okay. Okay. So pause says that once a thread enters the CPU it must do its work but do it slowly wait for some time and then only leave the CPU. Okay. In this case we will use the line thread dot sleep. Thread dot sleep means that thread will be paused for one second. Is that clear? Okay. Now but think about it. If thread is there sometimes you might want to pause it outside also inside also totally on the use case but threads can be paused as well. Now if I am pausing a particular thread can I say sometimes an interrupt can happen and it can happen I am not sure that the interrupt is definitely going to happen but it can't happen. Okay. So Java forces us to handle these kind of interrupts asking and what if someone interrupts this sleeping thread what are you going to do then? Is that clear everyone? Okay. Similarly when we were having the executor service and you were returning the output you must notice that the future is waiting. Right. Future is waiting for your answer. Future dot get waited for your future and then God done so. So in both the cases I am waiting I am on a waiting state and anybody can interrupt that waiting state. Okay. And that's why you must have seen that main was throwing exception. Okay. Which means that if I have this exception figure out how to handle it because anything can happen. Okay. So exception has occurred how to manage the exception with the help of the try catch block. Okay. In the try block you will write whatever you want which you feel like can cause a problem can cause an interruption. Okay. Remember some codes can be very very risky. Okay. And that is why we will have to use these try catch blocks. So you try the risky code if it works great but if it throws the exception then how to handle that exception that will come in the catch block. Is this clear everyone? Any doubt? Okay. So here you can write the code yourself also. This is a predefined exception which has a handle automatically. Otherwise you can also pass the exception to some other method which we will learn later. Okay. As of now is the working clear everyone? What is exception? Any interrupt that happens in a waiting thread or a sleeping thread which disrupts the normal cycle. Okay. And try catch blocks are used to handle it. That is it. Okay. You will get an error. No, no, it won't come out but the compiler will throw error that this block might throw exception and you are not handling exception. Okay. Like if you might have noticed that whenever you write programs even if you don't give such test cases which might fail the edge cases, this is the compiler will say that this test case might not pass. It is an error at your point handle it first and then I can run it because it can expect anything in the future. Same way, exception might not occur. Okay. It is not sure that in sleeping exception will occur but if it occurs what to do? So the compiler will write away through the error then exception was not handled. If in the previous code that we wrote in extruder service, if you remove the throws interrupted exception, write away and error will come that the exception was not handled. Okay. You might want to simulate something. Okay. Right now if I don't even have some work in the CPU, I might just want to see how the threads are going in. We'll see in an example also. Okay. So. Okay. Let us now move on to an example. This example I will write the code for this as well. Okay. This example says that imagine there is a college and it has three study rooms. Okay. Which means that it has only three study rooms which people can enter. Okay. And many students want to enter. Okay. But only three students can enter at a time. Yeah. But pretty much I am trying to simulate a smartphone only. But I have a critical section where three threads can enter at a time. Is that clear everyone what we are trying to do over here? And when someone leaves other let us say that there's not three study rooms. There is only one study room. Okay. In one study room three students can enter. Let us say this. Okay. So first three come they permits are available. They will stand over here all straight over here. All the other students are going to be waiting for the permit. After sometime if someone leaves the other one can enter and the process is going to continue. Okay. And you see how fair this is. Okay. We are not reserving this to only one single thread and wasting our resource. Everybody can utilize it. Okay. And it's a very safe and optimized mechanism. Okay. Is it clear everyone any issue as of now? Any issue? Okay. Okay then. Okay. Let me ask you a small question then we will move on to the code. Okay. Great. So you see over here I have a function use room and this shows interrupted exception. Okay. Now there are two lines. Okay. And both these lines can have exceptions. They both can be interrupted. Why? If you see the first line it says acquire. What does acquire me take permit? Okay. Now when I'm taking permit to enter the critical section. Can I say permits might not always be available? Right. And that is why I can go in the waiting stage. Okay. And again waiting stage can be interrupted at any point you have no idea. And that's why we need to handle the interrupted exception. Okay. The next one as of now the thread is sleeping. But does that mean it can have uninterrupted sleep? Maybe not. Somebody can come in and interrupt this thread. Okay. As the thread is interrupted I will again have to handle the interrupted exception. That's why both the lines here are like can have an exception and you'll have to handle the exception. Is it clear everyone any doubt at this point any doubt? Okay. If not let us go ahead and do a small code for SEMA 4 to see how exactly things are going to happen. Okay. As of now do you have any doubts if he has go ahead and ask? First of all we'll see the public class main and here I'm going to simulate one thing. Okay. I'm going to create one study room object. Okay. And we have seen that this was in the question also that I have one study room object. And let us say we'll create a class study room and the study room name is room is equal to new study room. Okay. So I have created only one single object. Now I say that maybe six students are trying to enter at the moment. So for I is equal to one I is SEMA equal to six. Okay. So every time I'm going to create a student. So I say student is some class and the object I create is student task. Okay. And this is a new student every time. Okay. So I can say that this is the room in which the student will go. Okay. And the student has entered and what the student number I can mention that also. So basically I can say in a room student one entered student to enter and so on. Okay. So this is that and after this to handle the students I create a thread. Okay. So thread t is equal to new thread and it will handle the student task which I just created. Okay. This is pretty much what we have been doing. And after this I am supposed to start the t task. Okay. Any problem in mail I have not done anything on a earth. I have not done anything too special. I have simply created one study room and I'm saying that there are six students as of now who want to enter the room. So I create a student task. Okay. And every task will be managed by a thread. Okay. And the thread is going to start. Okay. This is what we have done. Okay. Let us go ahead and create the appropriate classes. So as of now I create a class of study room. Now this study room has the permits. Right. This study room should have the permits and hence what will I implement? I am going to implement SEMA 4. Okay. So I write SEMA 4. Let us name it SEM is equal to new SEMA 4. Okay. And as of now how many SEMA 4s I want to give three permits. Okay. Now whenever you want to use SEMA 4, I'll have to import the class. Where is my cursor? Now I'll have to import the class. Okay. It is available in the concurrent library itself. So import java.util and concurrent. Dot SEMA 4. Okay. I like this. You have imported the required libraries. Study room has been created. It has three permits available. Now I want to create a method. Okay. And this method is going to represent that one student is using the study room. Okay. And it will also throw an exception because for a student to use the study room they might need or they might get. They will definitely need to acquire a permit. And hence they will use SEMA 4. acquire. Okay. Similarly, I will simulate some work also in the study room. So I'll just write C. Okay. So I write void use room. Okay. White use room and who is using the student name. Whatever is the student name that person is going to use the room. And see here I'll have to throw exception because this will require SEMA 4 to be acquired. Okay. The student tries to take one permit. If permit is available, student enters. Okay. And if all the three permits are already taken, student is going to wait. Okay. So what will I write? Sim. acquire. Okay. Sim that acquire will do the job. And after this, when the student actually gets the permit, it can do any work that I just want to. Okay. It wants to. So before that, let me just print simply that the student has entered the room. Okay. So we see that student name. Entered the study room. Okay. This is also done. Okay. After this, I want to simulate some work being done by the student, but I can't really show any work. So I will simply write thread dot sleep. So whichever thread has entered or whichever work has entered, now is sleep and I want to sleep for one second. Okay. You can if you want, you can sleep for more also. Okay. Next, once it has slept, it means that the student has studied in the room. And now I would like to leave. So I say student name has left the study room. Okay. And after it is leaving the study room, I can say that this my job is done. And I can safely release my permit. So I will say. Uh, Sim dot release. Okay. Is this clear? Every one we have simply simulated how the room will be used. Any doubt at this point? Any doubt any questions? Pretty simple study room is my shared resource. Okay. Sima for gives it permits three permits. I want to give. Okay. Sim dot acquire is available in the use room because use room is the critical section. This is where people will come and acquire the permit. Okay. If it has acquired the permit, it will print. The student name has entered the study room. Otherwise, it will go to the waiting queue. Okay. Once it enters, it can sleep and simulate the work of the uh, thread being there. And then the student can leave the room. After leaving the room, it will release the permit again. And Sima for which was earlier three came to two and are to go back to three. Okay. So at a time, how many people can enter? Three people can enter. Any doubt in this? Again, Sima four ports are extremely important. You will see a lot of assignments also in today's class. This will be using these concepts. Okay. If this is clear, now we'll move on to the student class, which we need to create. So student implements run-imble because it is going to be a task. Okay. And I need to use the study room. Okay. So study room, room let us say and the name of the student will be required. Okay. I just want to simulate some work. Okay. See what happens when you're working with threads. Printing statements are very, very quick. Okay. So too much context switching can happen. You will not be able to visualize it. Too many threads go away and come back. Okay. So when I want to just give it a moment to stay in the critical section, so that I can see how the other threads are waiting. If I don't write this, everything will happen too fast. Okay. And you will not actually be able to visualize that the other threads were actually waiting for one second. Till they actually received the permit, which was released by this current thread. Okay. So when I thread dot sleep, so whatever has entered will now wait there for one second before coming out. Okay. If it was a longer piece of code, I wouldn't need this. Okay. So printing is very, very small. Okay. It happens too quickly. That's the only reason I'm using thread dot sleep. Okay. And this also shows you that, computing the sleep also and you can be interrupted. And that's why we use exception also. So there are two use cases of thread dot sleep. Okay. If you want to can remove this in check as well, it will work in the exact same fashion. Okay. Any other doubt? Okay. So this is done. Student implements runnable. Student room. I will have to create a constructor now. So student is supposed to get study room. Okay. This is room. And it is going to receive a name. Okay. This dot room is equal to room and this dot. Name is equal to name. This is done pretty simple. Now I want to create the void function, which is going to be running my task. It does not return anything. That's why I'm using runnable. If I wanted to return something, I would have used callable at the moment. Okay. Remember use room may throw an exception. Okay. So if exception happens, what do we need to do? We need to handle it. How will we handle with the help of try catch blog? Where I will place them in the run method? That if something happens, become and run this. Okay. So here I will write try and what can try say? That go ahead and try use room. Okay. Who's going to try using it? The current student, which is named over here, husband given. Then it can catch an exception. So I am mentioning exception E. Exception E simply says, interrupted exception. Okay. So here I can print that line. I am going to print E itself, which will print the exception, interrupt, interrupt it exception. If you want, you can write anything, whatever you want to. Like the room was not empty. I waited for too long, whatever you want to. Okay. Is this clear, everyone? Any doubt as of now? Is this clear? See the three classes that we have made, try to focus here and tell me. If you have any issues. Okay. Check for errors as well, while you are there. Okay. Seema 4 is fine. This used row. Send it a choir. So it can be mentioned. Annabels to it. Shing name. So it's room. So you must find. Okay. Any other errors could you guys find? For loop? Okay. See, it is correct only. You know what happened in for loop? I is equal to one. I is as equal to six. I plus plus. The student string. Oh, here. Which line number? 44 only. This should be fine. What is the issue? That's it. Let me just check the error. I'm not able to understand honestly. No, it's fine. What was the error? I raised the comma now. That's the only thing. I saw that as well. That's why I was confused. What are you looking at? Okay. So anyways. So you see here when I run the program, what happens? That student 213 entered. Do you see how three students were able to enter at once? If I did not use Seema 4, what would have happened? So in one entered left the room. So in two entered left the room. But right now three students are going to enter. And they can leave at any point. Now see if I would not have you sleep, they might all just come out together. When I use sleep, what happens? I can actually simulate it. That's they are spending time in that use room function. The student to left. Because the moment student to left, student 4 was able to enter. It didn't wait for anything else. Okay. It simply entered. Then student 1 left and student 3 also left. Which means two permits are now available. And hence two students were able to enter. And then eventually all the three students have left the room. Is that clear everyone? Any issue over here? Please go ahead and ask if you have any concerns at this point. Any problem? Okay. And this is simulating an environment where my purpose can be given to multiple threads. They all can work concretely without without causing any problem. Any issues? If not, we will move on. I'll share the code with you all as well. Just a moment. At least and you see other videos in class try to mute it maybe. Okay. I'm sharing a dog with you all. It says concurrency problems. The first tab will contain the code of this particular question. Okay. And the rest are some questions that we will be solving together. Okay. Perfect. So you see that this was a SEMA for example. Now we also saw that there are two types of SEMA force. One is a binary SEMA for other is a counting SEMA for. Okay. When I say binary SEMA for it, me simply means that I'll put one over here. And this means only one permit is available. Counting SEMA for was any integer. Okay. Does not matter which one. Is that clear? So if you look at it, SEMA for which is binary nature only has one permit. Technically behaves like a log itself and nothing else. Okay. Whereas counting SEMA force decides how many people can enter and it can limit the number of threads also. Is that clear? Everyone? Any doubt? Okay. So in different languages, binary SEMA for and counting SEMA for have different different syntaxes also. But in Java, the syntax is exactly the same. Just write one to make it binary and any number to make it counting SEMA for. Okay. So based on this, please answer the next query. Pretty simple. Okay. SEMA for one arc like a binary SEMA for. Does that mean I cannot write new Simma 4 0? Can I write something like this? Tell me, as of Navi saw, Simma 4 1 acts as minus Simma 4, this is correct. But can I write this line? This is not binary definitely, but can I write something like the new Simma 4 0? Will it be any problem for us? Tell me. I can get you, please come again. No, lock is available. Simma 4 is there, it will have permits. But as of now, how many permits does this Simma 4 have? Correct. It has no permits at the moment. Simma 4 number denotes how many permits I have. If I write 0, it means no permits. So, Simma 4 is not only used for limiting access, but it has other purposes also. It can be used to control the order of execution as well. Up until now, you could see that even when I am now able to apply class level lock, object level lock, I can decide how many people can enter. But can I fix the order in this case? No, I am still not able to fix the order. So, whenever you want to control the order of execution, then also you can go ahead and use a Simma 4. And this Simma 4 is going to have 0 permits. This says that one thread can wait. And another thread can give that thread permission to continue. So, how does the Simma 4 work? So, if permits are 0, can any thread acquire a permit? Obviously, not. It cannot acquire the permit. So, whenever thread is trying to acquire, it will get stuck there itself. If it gets stuck, it will have to wait. The permits are 0 means the gate of critical section is closed. Unless and until someone opens that gate for you, you cannot enter. Is that clear everyone? So, now what we say that maybe there is some other thread. There is some other thread which opens the gate of the critical section for you. And hence it is saying that I am releasing one permit. Now, right now, Simma 4 has no permit, but one thread has entered critical section. And internally it is releasing Simma 4, which means now the Simma 4 has one available permit. So, someone else can then take this permit and enter the critical section. Does that make sense? Remember how we always say that release returns a permit. Did I say that release is going to take permit from whatever pool is available from that only and then give it back? No. Release simply releases one permit. Is that clear? Okay. So, in this scenario, now I will just explain you one more time. If somebody acquires or permits, it is requesting for one permit. If somebody releases one permit, it is letting go of the permit that it had previously. Now, if a choir is not there and someone is still releasing permit, it means that I am adding one permit to whatever was available. Even if multiple permits was available, I never required, but I have released it. I have added to the overall. Okay. Similarly, if one, sorry, zero permit was there, I did not acquire, but I am releasing one permit will be added. Is that clear? We'll see it in a code format and it will be even more easy to understand. Is it clear? Any doubt as of now? Okay. It's like earlier you are waiting outside the gate because it did not happen. But someone from the inside has now given you one permit. So, the waiting thread is able to enter any question at this point. No, right? Okay. So, Let us do one small quiz first. Pretty easy. Perfect. Perfect because this Emma 4 is zero. There are no permits. There are no permits. So, all the threads that you have will be in the waiting stage. Clear? Okay. So, moving on, let us understand this with the help of an example. So, up until now, we have seen that whenever I have two threads, I cannot guarantee the order. Okay. Thread one thread to anyone can run first, but now I want to say that thread one should execute first. Okay. Then thread two should execute first. Okay. Is that clear everyone? So, if I am saying this, I can manually make this second thread wait. Yes or no? I can manually make this second thread wait. How? By making sure that the Emma 4 is zero initially. Okay. Now inside the second thread that we have, we say acquire. It is trying to acquire nothing is available. It is waiting. Okay. And when it does get something eventually, it will start running. Okay. So, you see that acquire will make you wait and I cannot print anything unless and until some data or some permit is given to it. Okay. So, second waste before printing. And I will also write a first thread in this first thread also. I am going to print first and see this is releasing. Do you notice how I never tried to acquire any Emma 4? And hence I was never in the waiting state. Okay. So, even if second I do I go ahead and write this. Second dot start at the moment. Even if I write second dot start first and then I write. Then I write first dot start. What will happen according to this? I am assuming that second may start first, but because second is in the waiting state, it will never start. First is going to start first and then once it release it. Okay. Once it releases one permit, it is given to the second thread. Okay. That is what is going to happen. Is that clear everyone? Any doubt at this point? Okay. So, if you look at this, isn't the first thread kind of like giving a permission that as I have done my job, go ahead, take my permit and complete whatever you want to. And now the ordering of this has been fixed as well. Is it clear? Any question at this point? We will see how to put this in code. Before this, we will see one more thing. As of now, you have seen that acquire always throws an exception because while you are acquiring it, don't get the permit, you might go into the waiting stage. You will want to handle exception. Suppose I do not want to handle the exception. Then instead of simply writing acquire, you can write acquire and interrupt. Okay. Now, acquire, unentriply means that take one permit from the SEMA 4. If no permit is available, wait. But don't make me handle the exception. Okay. Simply means that I do not be writing the throws exception code because then I'll have to implement a tri-crash block also. So, I don't want to implement that block. That's why I'm using it. In your code which you will get in your exams, you will cannot use this. Okay. You will have to handle exception. So, coming back over here. So, let us make a normal printer thread. Print a print is equal to new printer. This is a task which I have. Okay. And then I want to create two threads. So, normally I would write thread one equal to new thread and make a reliable object and all of that to avoid it. Okay. Let me just show you how that would have worked. You must have seen me doing this. Thread T1 is equal to new threads. And then you would go ahead and make the object of runable. Right. And after you make this object of runable, you could write a public function which is going to be void and this is the run function which I'm going to implement. And then you can write that printer object implements the first function available. So, you must have done this in the previous classes. And not even exactly this, you would then implement the whole class in that run, write an unimble. So, I'm giving you a shortcut to write this. So, right now I'm implementing the lambda expression. This says thread T1 is equal to new thread. Please look at the syntax very carefully. Okay. New thread and this thread is going to implement the lambda expression which says printer dot first. Okay. Now this is in fact the exact same code which we just wrote over here. Okay. New thread contains the object of printer and it is going to execute the first function. Is that clear? Okay. Just to shorten the code, I'm writing this. If you're not comfortable, please implement the entire class and everything. Okay. So, then I create T2 thread. Okay. T2 thread says that I want to call second. Okay. This is done. Now you see I will manually start T2 first. I am starting T2 first and then I'm starting T1. Okay. So, according to this logic, my first job would be to run T2 and then T1. But as per my question, I want to run T1 first and then the second one. Okay. Now, let us go over to the printer class. Print a class is what is supposed to happen half the seam up. Okay. So, say class is printer and right now I have zero FEMA force. Okay. Which means there is no permit to give. Okay. Okay. Next, I want to implement a function. First, what happened girls? Last column. Okay. White for white first. As if I don't want to give any parameter simple print function. It does not need to throw exception also because I have a acquired unindepte. So, here what is happening that I want first to simply release the lock. Do not acquire anything. So, here we are not going to use the acquire line. Okay. And this says. So, some about our print and what are you printing? Simply print first. That's it. And then you give permission to the other function to run or the other thread to run. So, I'm going to say that. I want sem dot release. Okay. So, see by releasing one permit has been added. Now I can go ahead and write the second function. Now, you see second function is requesting for acquiring. Okay. And I will acquire unentruple. So that I don't have to throw exception in all. So, please. Just checking the spelling over here. I acquire unentruple. Okay. Great. So, it has now been waiting once the first function is the queues and it gives it. The permit to execute it is going to print second. And that is pretty much all that we have to do. Let us just say. If it is fine. This should be printed. Okay. So, you see now first has run and then second has run. Okay. Is it clear everyone? How we have maintained the order? We just make sure that the thread one never actually asked for a permit. It is simply going to run enter the technical section without. Taking permit and then whatever permit it had it is going to give to whatever thread that executes next. The Cma for is zero. So, if I am requesting see acquire unentruple here I am requesting a Cma for nothing is available. So, second is in the waiting state. What a second second is the thread to implementation. Okay. Any doubt at this point any question. What does it mean? It simply means that early in the previous point you were throwing exception. Right. So, here you will go ahead and create a printer class have a run function that run function throws exception. And then you handle the exception you do not try cash block. I just wanted to remove all of that to shorten the code. So, I have instead of acquiring because acquiring might cause interruption or exception handling is needed. I have seen that without any interruptions you can go ahead and acquire. Nobody is going to interrupt you. And I have not used sleep also. Sleep on other things was going to have some exceptions which I am not using. So, there is no need to throw exception just to shorten the code I have done that nothing else. In your program that you will get in your exams you will need to handle exceptions. Any doubt at this point if you have any questions go ahead and ask. Very simple that here I am simply say if my second thread is trying to acquire no interrupt can happen over here while I am waiting. I will definitely wait because permit is not available but while I am waiting nobody is going to make me leave the queue that is all. Go over the code and tell me if you have any other issues please learn the short hand form of calling the functions in all it will be much easier to implement in the exam also. Still if you are not comfortable you can use a traditional way which we have been doing till date. I am adding the code under cma40 again check that out. Any questions at this point if yes go ahead and ask. So, I have one small question for you just answer the quiz and then we will move on to a small code. Please notice that acquire says that you definitely have to wait if the permit is not available. Same thing will be done by the other one also. I will have to wait if permit is not given to me but for acquire you will need the try catch block. Why do you need the try catch block because exceptions can happen over here and I can be interrupted. But here I can say that there is no try catch block needed. No try catch block is needed why because interrupts cannot remove me from my waiting. Is the difference between the two clear now. Any questions. If there are no more questions go to the question doc and in this question doc you can see ordering threads using cma4. What we have done right now. You will be given three methods wide print a wide print b wide print c and each method is called by a different thread. And your task is to make sure that a bc come in the exact same order. If you do not use the cma4 ordering then it can come in any order possible. The template also has been mentioned go ahead try it out. If not able to solve it we will solve it together in five minutes. Try to write the code it is very very simple exactly like we did the previous one. You can use either of the two methods I will just show you the answer with a choir show so that you can understand how try and catch block will be written. You can create two different cma4s also. It is not compulsory to have one single cma4 with multiple permits. You create multiple cma4s with any amount of permits that you want to. Right now because I want to make a two threads weight it is ideal to use two cma4s. So, you can do that if you want to. Regency would you like to go out of the class and use your phone. You can do that if you want to. Take two more minutes try to solve this if you are not able to we will write the code. You can do that if you want to. You can do that if you want to. You can do that if you want to. Okay. So, let us do this and we have the main function and this is where we need to create the printing. I am at main I need to create multiple objects. I will have a class printer. I am naming it as order printer because I want to print in order. And then I am naming the object as printer. So, one object has been created. Now I want to have thread T1 and T1 will be working on the first printer function. So, I say printer dot print a print a is also a function. So, what I am trying to do that in my printer object of the ordered printer class. I am going to have one function there print a what will print a do it is going to simply print and do nothing else. Okay. Now, see over here this is not going to ask for any cma for it does not need to write a choir. And as it is not using a choir, I will not need to throw any exception. But for the other two threads which will be creating thread T2 is new thread. Okay. Here if you notice that at this point I do need to acquire a thread. Okay. I do need to acquire a permit in fact. So, here I will start with my try and catch block. Please look at the syntax carefully. This is the body of your thread and the lambda expression. Okay. Here itself write try. So, what will try do? Try will try to acquire the lock. Okay. So, it will call the print B function. Let us name it and B function is acquiring the lock. If it requires the lock well in good. And if it is in a waiting and something happens, I will need to handle exception. Okay. Exception E and I am going to print now. System not out. Not print. And what I want to print I just simply want to print E over here nothing else. So, the thread 2 has been created in a very similar fashion. I am creating thread 3 also. Okay. Thread T3 new thread and then you again here you will print C. Okay. So, we will have a print C function and that is all. Okay. After creating the three threads you can start it however you want to. And then you can say T2 dot start T3 dot start. Okay. And T1 dot start. Now you know very well that at the moment if you look at it T1 is what we want to run first because that is the one printing a. Okay. Now let us go to a class. Okay. This is ordered printer. So, ordered printer can have two CMA force. First CMA 4 I am saying has zero permits and there is another CMA 4 which has zero permits again. Okay. I am naming it B and C so that you can understand that thread B will ask permit from CMA and so on. Okay. After this we are going to write the function. So, first function is wide print a. Okay. And what does wide print a do? Do I need to throw any exception? No. Because I do not even acquire anything. So, I am simply going to print. So, what do I print over here? Let us simply print a. Okay. After printing a it is going to release our lock. What do I want to execute next? I have a b c a has been printed. I want to print B. So, I will give a permit to this send B. So, send B dot release has been written. Okay. After this you see I will have to do the exact same thing for the others also. But with a couple of differences. So, then I move on to print B over here and print B can throw an exception. So, I will handle that exception. Okay. Rather if you see we have 100 it already. It is going to throw exception because it is waiting to acquire from where can I require. I want to acquire from send B. Okay. This is also done and here we are going to print B. Now, I acquired the permit from send B to whom should I give the next permit to send C. Because, send C is the same of four from where your third thread will be accessing per permit. So, we write print C throws exception. Send C acquire and then you want to print it. As of now I am not releasing any permit. It is not required. If you want to you can release that. Okay. Pretty simple program if you see. Just go through it and tell me if you have any questions. Yes, Bumi you can. Here print C. Any other routes? If you want to wherever your print function is then itself handle the dry catch. I have written it here if you see where it is in the print C only, nowhere else. So, however you want to implement you can implement. This is just a shortcut of writing everything nothing else. Is it clear any doubt at the moment it has run in test for errors first? And see ABC has printed why? Because we have fixed an ordering. Is that clear everyone? Any question at this point? I am adding this code to your document as well. You can go ahead and try it out. Where? Just a moment. In print in wide print C you are not throwing exception but you are writing semc.equal. That is the exception no that is the error that you see interrupt has not been handed. This says that semc is asking for acquiring. Suppose it acquires the permit everything is fine. According to you if you think about it I am releasing the permit and semc will immediately acquire it. But it might happen that you are supposed to wait. I was asking for permit because the other thread has never run. It has never released the permit for you. If it never release the permit you will need to wait. Now if you are waiting you can be interrupted. So if you don't throw an exception over there it will say that you are not handling the exception which can happen if this thread goes into waiting. It is not saying that it will definitely go ahead and wait and then it will have an error. But the chances are that it might happen. So in the worst case scenario I want to handle it. So in any case if you are acquiring or if you are sleeping in those cases you will get interruptions possibly. And if you don't handle it it will automatically show you an error. I told you that in the beginning itself that it will always give you error. That is why if you notice in print A I am not throwing exception and no problem is there. Because I am releasing if I am releasing my task is done I don't want anything. If I would have acquired over here then it would be a problem. If you don't want to write the exception then instead of using acquire right in acquire interview. What does that mean? Nobody can interrupt me while I am waiting. That's all. It is still waiting. Any other doubts? I have shared the code in your doc as well. You can go ahead and look at it. We will have two small quizzes and then we will end the class. We do have a couple of topics left but we will cover it in the next class that we have together. Answer this all the best. If any CMA 4 with 0 it simply means that I want something to wait. I want something to wait unless some other task is going to trigger it. Next one. Thank you. So, here also even if you see that I am starting T2 over here and then I am starting T1 over here. Sequence is different. But because I have made second wait for first the answer will always be first and then second no matter how I have started the threats. So, you see at the end now with the help of CMA 4 we are able to control the number of permits. We are able to make sure only one thread also enters that is also possible. We are able to handle the ordering also. This will mark the end of conical and see there is just one single problem left which is the producer consumer problem which works pretty much in the same fashion as the ABC problem. But before we move to this I have one question for you all. How many of you are willing to prepare for gate or is row? Please press a thumb such that you can count it. So, why I am asking this question is because if I just teach you the producer consumer problem according to the scalar curriculum will mostly see programs. But if you want to prepare for gate and is row you might see some numerical problems from here. So, just tell me how many of you are willing to do that. In that case we will discuss the program as well as the numerical form from this particular topic. In the next class that we have together we will be discussing numerical from producer consumer and we will see how the program works. The next topic that we will be discussing is going to be deadlock and from deadlock also we will have numerical and we will have code also. Okay, we will end the class now. I start taking the attendance please do not move out of the class until attendance is marked. If you have any questions by the time you can share it in the chart section. You You You You You You You