you you I Let's get started. So today we will study about feature engineering. So what is feature engineering does anyone know? What exactly is feature engineering? Does anybody has any idea? What is feature first of all? What is feature characteristic? So he can't. It's not, listen to literal sense what feature exactly means one second. It seems I forgot my pen on my desk. Can anyone please help me out here? We need to go to the first floor. Can anyone please come? Yeah, please go to the first floor. You know where the program team sits? Does anybody know where the program team sits? Block A. Block A left side. Block A left side. There's a seat where like some stuff is kept back and things like that. So there would be a pen like object. Not a literal pen but a pen for this. Similar to that. Yes. Cool. Why is it brings the pen? So we were discussing features. What are features? Does anybody has any idea? And why is the center section empty? Any idea anyone about feature? What is a feature? No one knows. Nobody is kind of interested in technology like machine learning and AI. If you are then probably some of the research that you might have done. If you ever heard of the term features variables. So variables is something that we have been discussing. So feature is something you can consider the attribute of the data. For example, this. This is a data set that represents various things like education of an individual. Gender of individual income fitness level usage. You said of any certain product and the specific product. So each of the columns like here education gender income fitness usage. These are actually the features of a data set. So and product is not a feature in this sense because here we want to actually predict the product. So we are saying given the education gender income fitness level usage of a. Individual. A predict what product is the user going to use. So this product is actually called a target. So this is not a feature for our use case for this problem. Here we are trying to predict the. You say, predict the product that user is going to use. So this is actually called a target. My rest of the variables are called features because we are going to use that predict this. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. So we were just discussing about features. Here the problem is that we want to predict. What product will the user use or purchase. This is what we are trying to solve. So it's a prediction or classification problem. So how do you predict that you predict that based on the information. That is given to you or the features like education gender income fitness usage. So anything else do you think. Might be helpful to predicting the. The product that user might purchase. So here of it is basically a fitness company. They sell. Another fitness equipment. Nearby things like that. So based on your logical reasoning. What else apart from this information can help me predict whether a user will buy a certain product or not. Okay very good ages. Could be another feature. What else. Anything else. Okay you mentioned income bracket. So I see income column. How do I convert it into income bracket. Sorry. Very good. So you can bend the income column into income bracket. Right. So see what we did here. We used an existing feature income and created a new feature out of it. Call income bracket. Yes or no. So we had income. Using some logic or any intuition. We converted income into income bracket and created a new feature. So this process of creating new features is called feature engineering. This process is called feature engineering. Now why this might be important. Like why this process of feature engineering might be important. Can anyone think of a reason. Why. Right. So in a way you are saying that it adds more information. So feature engineering provides more information. More information. That can be useful. Now it's not always necessary that your newly created feature or newly added information. It might not always be helpful. But depends upon case to case. In this case where you kind of want to predict the product. It might be helpful. So feature engineering allows us to add more information from the existing variable. Like that more information. For example, let's say we have income right. Let's say somehow I also. Introduce. A column called. Savings like this how much money does the. User has. Savings. Excuse me. Savings right how much money does the user has. Safe or the sailing rate. Can you create something else that might be predictive. That might be helpful in predicting the product. I have the income. I created an I somehow got information about the saving. Capacity or savings of the user. Can I create something. Can I engineer a new feature that might be helpful in predicting the product that the user might buy it. Let's say this is monthly savings monthly savings. And this is your annual income. Anything that you can create. From this you cannot extract like what type of work they are doing. Somebody working in any property as a business they might have a higher income. Somebody doing a full time job might also have a higher income. But just using income and monthly savings. Think about it. Think if I have an income X. And I have a monthly savings of Y. What can you create just by these two variables. Right. The spending capacity or the purchasing capacity. So I can say purchasing capacity. This is monthly savings. And this is annual income. How do I bring them to the same scale. Yes. So I can get a monthly purchasing capacity by simply doing X divided by 12 minus Y. So this is the amount that the user usually spends in a month. Now a proportion of it might be can be divided to the product. Usually if the spending is high. Maybe they could kind of start spending on product. Or maybe if the spending is low, then we can say that the user has some buffer to spend on this product. From fitness products. So this process of kind of creating new features out of the existing features is known as feature engineering. And why it is useful because it might add extra information. Or you can say it might add being some predicting power for predicting your target variable. Is that clear. Any questions anyone. So basically that's the idea behind feature engineering. Let me also quickly share this notebook with you. So I'll say notebook one. So we have two notebooks that we need to cover today. First notebook. Starts with the. You know. Data analysis part we have already done data analysis in depth in the previous sessions. So we'll quickly skim over it and readily jump to the. Feature in the part, but it's quite detailed even if you read it will understand before moving on to that. Let's look at one more example. I want to predict. I want to know whether a person is fit or not. So let's say. So I'll tell you how generally business problems are given to you. You will not be given a problem saying that. This is X. This is a data set and this is a predicting point just a random machine learning algorithm on top of it. That's not how industry functions. They'll come with a very vague problem. And they'll expect you as data scientist or machine learning engineers to actually convert it into a machine learning problem. And solve for it. So let's say you're a CEO or a product manager comes to you and says. I want to know whether a person is fit or not. How will you kind of solve it using data analytics or machine learning. How will you first of all construct data and order data scheme with this statement. I want to know whether a person is fit or not. How will you kind of start approaching this problem. You can start with basically collecting basic information about an individual that relates to the fitness. Something like weight and height. Let's say I collect out of all the people present here. I know your weights and height. I can say W1H1, W2H2, so on and so forth. Now using this information, how do I figure out whether someone is fit or not. Now I can go to a health specialist and take this data with them. Someone who is from a medical background and just by looking at weight and height they could kind of or they have the subject matter expertise to kind of figure out whether someone is fit or not. They give me an algorithm or they just let you know based on the weights and height whether someone is fit or not. One means that fit, zero means they are not fit. Just by this information they kind of predicted if somebody is fit or not. How did they do it. In medical science generally there is a concept called BMI. Body mass index and that BMI can be calculated using these two data points. Which is weight divided by height squared. So they might have applied this formula. Based on the weight and height I can create a new feature called BMI which is nothing but weight divided by height squared. Let's say B1, B2, B3, B4. If this BMI is actually above a certain threshold, let's say certain threshold tau. If it's greater than that maybe we can say somebody is fit and if it's less than tau they are not fit. So this process again, this is just using weight and height I created a new information called BMI and now BMI has the highest predicting power. Why? Because based on the BMI I actually calculated if somebody is fit or not. So using an existing information I created a new information which has the highest predicting power for predicting whether someone is fit or not. Now you can go to your boss and say hey if you want to see whether someone is fit or not just ask for the height and weight. Use this formula and if it's above the threshold consider them as fit if not they are not fit. Is that clear? So that's the fundamental concept behind feature engineering. Any doubts, any questions anyone? Any questions anyone? So this one has a lot of theory as well so whenever you revise and read this again everything is kind of explained in terms of words here. So we're going to look at an example of a business years of loans status prediction. So basically you're working for a bank bank generally lands out loans right now how do they decide whether they need to give someone a lot of. That's the problem that you'll be starting with predicting or basically creating new information to see whom to give loan and whom not to give loan. Basic library is important. NumPyPanda is natural if Seaborn warning so kind of ignore any warnings that I get loading the data set using W gate. And finally loading the data set using simply the reach CSV function. So data.cft helps me there are 614 rules and 13 columns. This is how my data set looks like and these are the column descriptions. So I have a load ID which is a unique identity fire and there are some examples sample data. Then you have gender whether an applicant in the middle of email. So that's the basic values made in the middle. Marital status whether they are married or not married number of family members there are 4 values 0.2. So can someone have a group of members. Can someone have a group of members. They might be alone right they have nobody no dependence as such so nobody kind of dependent on them that's what it means. Education what is the education level whether the graduate or their undergraduate. Whether they're self employed that means they are kind of working as a business or yes or no. Applicants monthly salary income so monthly how much could they make. Co applicant usually. In some cases there are two applicants there are more than one kind of applied for loan so what is there monthly income like your two applicants income. How much does the person actually make. No amount term in days. How much how many days does the kind of I think it should be months. This should be months how many months be the kind of repay the loan amount. Credit history is basically a column. If you have kind of taken loans in the past and have defaulted on it and not given back then you might have a bad credit history but if you are kind of. At the time we have we have repaid the loan at. Timely manner you might have a good credit history. The property area whether they live in a rural area semi open area. And five of the most areas. So now if I want to kind of predict my goal is to kind of build a model that predicts whether somebody needs. Whether we should give them a loan or not. Just by looking at the stable can you tell me which is which are the features and which are the target. Which column is the feature and which are the targets. Which column is the feature and which are the targets. Target is something that I want to predict. So what do I want to predict. Loan status. So that means loan status is my target very even. This is what I want to predict. So rest of them are features. I can use this information to kind of predict. Can I should I use loan ID by the way. Could loan ID add information information. Yes or no. Why. Think again. What type of information what type of information does it give or let me ask you this way. Do you think yourself if you are giving someone money if you are giving someone your money. What will you look at. Before giving them money what will you look at. If you are lending money you are lending money. What will you look at. If you are giving someone money what will you look at. Credit history. How much they earn. Right. Do they have any existing loans. Things like that. Will you think like what is the ID. So loan ID is just a reference number. It doesn't mean anything. Loan now already have no. So see if I am taking loan I will have a loan ID 1. If I go again and take another loan I will have a loan ID 2. So just a number like is this a number in a way that gives you a identifier or just a unique number. It doesn't have any value as such. It's just a way to kind of index things. Loan now I already have here. Right. I have rest of the characteristics of the individual. So loan ID is per se will not add any value. So generally identifiers are dropped by trading the models. We call identifiers who know that they are just a unique number. They tell and meet anything in reality. Is that clear? Any questions anyone? Any doubts in that? Cool. So that's about it. Like that's about the data that we have. And these are kind of values that we have. You can see that I have a non value here about the loan amount. That means I don't know like somehow I don't have that value. So best situation would be to kind of drop the value here. Drop this data point because we don't have the actual loan amount. So we can't actually predict. It won't make sense to predict because you don't know what's the loan amount. I should answer me this question. I have a person one person a person B. Both ask for a 50 lakhs loan. One was given a loan and the other was not given a loan. Why could that be? Any thoughts? Okay. Right. So you get up get get this point right. If you add any extra source of information explaining this might become easy. Like as you said, they're civil school. This person might have a good or a high civil school. Why this might have a lower civil school? You said credit history same thing as a school. They might have a good credit history or bad credit history. Or you can also see income. For example, let's say this person earns 30 lakh rupees. So what do you think out of the two people who has better chances of kind of paying you back to the loan? The one who of course wants more right? So the point here is that adding extra piece of information. Adding extra piece of information helps you better predict the actual target variable. So the point I'm trying to try here is the importance of features and the future. The better features you can have in your data set better information that you'll have in your data set. Better your better your model will be able to predict your target column. Is that clear? So that's the importance of future. Cool. So the first few sales of the notebook kind of actually goes through into exploratory data analysis of basic data analytics. So we are looking at the value counts of the dependence. So this shows that kind of majority of the people that kind of come for loans. Do not have a dependent people. By only a few have more than three dependence. See we are here dropping the loan ID because it doesn't actually make sense. And the explanation is there it does not has an impact on the status of the loan so we can simply remove it. So I'm dropping the loan ID looking at the describe about the basic statistics about descriptive statistics of the data. So these things we have already seen in point as number five and Matt or live that we were doing. So I'm not going to spend too much time upon it. Of course the insights I've some analysis everything in detail here once you read the notebook you will kind of get to know more about it. But this is something that you can do on your own as well because we've already discussed that. Now we'll directly kind of jump to the feature engineering part which is here. One second. Creating new features. Rest is just data analytics that we've already discussed you can go through it there are a few quizzes also which you can attempt. This is something that we're going to learn new about today. The goal is to kind of creating new features like converting loan amount to years we just we saw that right. A loan amount term is actually here the loans reprimand period in days is actually months. As if this is loans reprimand period in months how do I convert it into years. If the data is in months how do I convert it into years. We can divide by 12 right. Yes so we'll try to create these features will do the bidding as you discussed in compact things like that. So one thing regarding the loan amount term. Why is it important. Essentially as you can get a loan reprimand duration. For example if 60 lakh of loan one is kind of being has to be repaid in 12 months while the other might have to be repaid in 36 months. So this will take three years and this might take one year. Quick question which one do you think banks would prefer. One year one or three year one. One or three. Why one. Okay. They'll get money back quickly. Why do they want their money back quickly by the way. Like what's the rush. Okay so they could lend it again. Okay valid point. Anything else. Why three. So one argument for three years they'll get more. Interest for a longer period. Okay so the I mean there's no fixed answer to this question depends on a lot of other feature factors also. So the chances of someone defaulting in three years is also high. Somebody might take your money and run away. If somebody has to pay it quickly if the bank is kind of receiving their money quickly. The chances of somebody defaulting or somebody kind of taking their money and running away would become less because they have to kind of quickly repaid the. In this case they might pay interest for one year and then they might run away. So the point is valid that they could get more interest but it's there's also risk person learning. But again no right answer here. No wrong answer. It depends on person to person if let's say looking at the individual as I said just by looking at one information. You might not be able to concretely comment on things if the person is. They've taken loans previously for longer years and they have kind of paid it back as well. So in that case bank might be more happy to lend a longer term loan because they would get regular interest on the other hand if they feel that. They might need to get money but the person might be a little risky so they might want to kind of give more. More shorter period of loans so it depends right and individual to individual doesn't make sense. So there's no right or wrong answer in this case you need more information. So again I'm trying to drive the point more features more information could help you make better decisions. Doesn't make sense yes or no. Cool. So if you look at the loan amount term we can see that. This is the distribution in terms of much. The only one was the second to have my loan directly years 60 and so on. Now we're kind of taking we have the raw data in terms of months so I'm going to kind of divide by 12. And you know what about the actual years right now that it is actually in years and I'm doing a count plot. So you see I see a lot of people have taken loan for kind of 30 years. And the point is kind of belonging to 30 years while the rest are not that in quantity. Cool now also we're trying to plot the loan amount so I'm plotting a histogram and a box plot simultaneously. See what inside can you draw from this. Why and is actually loan status with respect to loan amount. I think we've discussed already like these box plots and histograms so what inside can you draw from. These charts. Answer this question just by the loan amount can you figure out or can you segregate someone. Getting their own status accepted yes or no just by looking at the loan amount. Yes or no why no. Why. So that's my question that's what my question is just by looking at the loan amount and this plot can you say yes or no like. I can say I cannot say that loan status can be determined just by looking at the loan amount. And these two charts blocks is similar. They're similar right. Loan status yes might have a few extra outliers there and there but apart from that. Doesn't it look all over identical. So just by looking at the loan amount I cannot figure out whether somebody might get a loan or might not get a loan. So I need more information to segregate this just by looking at the loan amount I might not be able to kind of comment whether someone will receive the loan or not so I need more information. And from this I can infer that most of the information or most of the loan amount is between 100 to 200,000. While only a few are asking for 700,000 or 7 lakh worth of loan. What type of distribution is this. What type of distribution is this. Sorry. Who said that. What type of distribution is that. In terms of skewness. This is the right skew distribution. Why because the tail is. Everyone the right say. Cool. So you see an important feature that we're creating here. Able to pay EMI. Right. So we're going to create a new feature to estimate if a person can pay EMI. Right now I'm trying to find loan amount per year. How am I doing that. I have the total loan amount and I have the loan amount term. So let's say. I have the loan amount of six lakhs or 600,000. And the loan period is three years. So how much amount do I need to pay per year. For now, exclude the interest because we don't have the interest state information. We can have that but let's say for now there's no interest. How can I find that I what is the loan amount that needs to pay it back every year. We can divide these values. Loan amount per year. So that would be 200. So I need to pay back 200 a loan amount every year. Right. And I have an income of let's say 500 a. Or let's take 600 a six lakhs per year. How should I create a feature whether I'll be able to pay back or not. Can anyone think so this is the amount paid I have to pay per year. Just by that think if I just simply do income greater than pay per year. Can I classify whether they'll be able to pay or not. Just by looking at these two values can I do. So see here you need to think logically also. What do what does a few person do with their income. They can spend outside also right I might have other necessities that I might have to meet after I've done that. If I have kind of money left for paying the loan per year or not. So let's say we take a random number for now. Usually if you're working for a bank you will have your subject matter experts who might help you with that. But let's say assume that a percent kind of if the 30 percent if 30 percent of your income. 30 percent of income is actually greater than the loan amount that you need to pay per year. Then you can say whether the person will be able to pay the EMI or not. So 30 percent of this would be what 100 80k. So this is the amount 30 percent of my income. Is this less or more than the amount that I need to pay per year. It's more than that right. So I might consider that this person might not be able to pay the EMI. Yes or no because 200 is more than 80. So I'll say that able to pay EMI is actually no. So again do you see the point here it's not purely algorithmic thing that you need to learn. It's your inclusion that you need to develop or fundamental business logic that you need to develop. What kind of things that such thing. Now see what would have been the problem if you would have just created the feature basis this if income greater than your paper year. By that logic the answer to this question able to P EMI would be what yes. And now if you would have developed a predictive model or a machine learning model that would predict someone's loan status it could learn learn wrong information. So even if you're using a very advanced algorithm but if you're creating wrong data or wrong information they might recognize it might not be able to learn that pattern. So there's a concept called garbage in garbage out. In data science and machine learning if you are feeding garbage to the model no matter how complex or how advanced let's say you're feeding to a transformer. Right or a large language model if you're feeding garbage to it no matter how complex the model is no matter how intelligent the model is. It would give you garbage so a model is as good as the data you feed in. So if you use wrong logic wrong business logic or wrong logical information and fed to the model your model will learn wrong things and give you wrong output. So it's again very important to think from this perspective while solving machine learning problems. Is that clear. So I created a feature called loan out per year simply dividing loan amount and divided by loan amount term. Now one thing that if you look at the loan amount loan amount loan amount. So it's actually in thousands like 100,000 it's not just 700,000 because 700 is no one's income right 700,000 is the income. So what am I doing here is I'm multiplying it with 1000. Our loan amount is in thousands of dollars so we have to calculate EMI in thousands of dollars so I'm going to multiply it with 1000. And then divide by 12 assuming that we have no interest so this would become my kind of monthly EMI because I have a month per year I'm dividing by 12 so that will give me monthly EMI. So this is the EMI that I need to pay per month you could do it at an year level also monthly is also fine. So I'm doing a monthly EMI. Now we have salary and EMI how will you calculate able to pay EMI. So here see what I'm doing if 30% of the total income if 30% of the total income is more than the EMI. If this condition is true then able to pay EMI as an answer of true as it has false. Lastly I'm converting it into integers so it can work true to one and false zero. This is what I'm doing. See if the EMI if the income is more than the EMI 30% of the income is more than EMI so the answer will be true. Else it will be false and when I do dot as type integer so it's type conversion it will convert into zero and one one being true zero being false. Is that clear? So this is how I kind of get a feature called able to pay EMI. Is that clear? Yes or no? Any doubts anyone any confusions? Cool. Now we have two categorical variables one is loan status which is the actual target variable and able to pay EMI which we just created. Instead of plotting it now do you see the difference? So I'm doing a count plot where on x axis I have able to pay EMI and the rule is actually loan status. See or this is the table that I basically for this chart. This is the visual representation this is the tabular representation. Now look at this where the label is one where we are saying that somebody is able to pay the EMI so the answer is true. What is a loan status? If someone is able to pay EMI let's say let's calculate the loan status ratio for this 401 divided by the sum of these two. 574. 69 roughly 70 percent. On the other hand here 21 divided by 40 52 percent. So clearly we see a significant difference where the answer to the question if they are able to pay EMI is yes. Then they are actually able to pay the EMI out of those 70 percent of the cases have the loan status as yes. So that means in 70 percent cases they are able to kind of pay back the loan. By on the other hand where the answer to the question able to pay EMI is false whether they are not able to pay EMI it's almost equally distributed whether they will get the loan or not get the loan roughly 50 50 percent. So you see creating this feature is actually helpful in segregating the two classes whether someone will be able to pay whether someone will get the loan or not get the loan. Clearly 1 is 70 percent and on the other hand I am seeing a roughly 50 percent. So this feature is actually helpful doesn't make sense? Any doubts any questions in this anyone? Any questions? Cool so here we are doing a chi square test. Did you cover hypothesis testing in your previous time as to what does a chi square test mean? When do I use a chi square test? When do I use a chi square test? What is the null hypothesis for chi square test? So try to read about it go back and revise so these things are very important. Cool a quiz that I have for you. So you are working on a data set for predicting house prices. So you are going to predict what actually the house prices are going to be. Your feature called year bill representing the year the house was built in so in which year the house was actually built. It does not have any missing items. So you have to improve the model's performance. The feature engineering technique you apply to your build. What feature engineering technique you will do? So let me tell you imputation means filling the missing values. We will see that. If you have missing value in your data you kind of impute with some values. Imputation means filling the missing values. Bening we have just discussed or create a new feature. Out of the three which one will you pick? Which one do you think can add a value? Bening can add more value because we have a if you look at the column year build right and year could be 1947 just for example. On the other hand one could be 2020 right. So you can have vast amount of values in between. So the question the quizzes suggesting meaning the year into decades. So creating categories of broad level let's say three decades old. Two decades old or zero decade old can help model identify. More nuanced details about your house. This zero decade old can signal that this is actually a new property right. And while this is a very old property. So bening in terms of decades could be a helpful approach. Imputation simply means where you are missing values so you fill it with some value. Impute certain values with that. But the question already says that does not contain any missing values. So imputation is anyway not the right answer create a new feature just by. Years you cannot simply say that creating a new feature would be helpful. But what type of feature that you want to create that should be the question. Is that here? Any questions anyone? So detailed explanation for this is here you can read about it. And the previous like the before this we already only have the data analytics part. Maybe a kind of visualizing the data. The plotting charts and extracting insights. We have already discussed that in previous two sessions. So you can just take a look at it. It's just we have what we have already covered is just a recap of that. So that's the first part of the feature and in a ring where we kind of. Looked into how can we create new features. What's the point the feature in in a ring how it can add more value to it more value to our prediction problem. Next we will look at various types or various techniques of feature and in a ring. Just like we discussed bening we discussed imputation will look into these things more in more detail. Let me quickly share this notebook with you. So it's 3pm. Let's take a quick break 5 minute break and then we will kind of get started with this. This is a little in depth. So we look about imputation which was a success. We will discuss this in detail which we have used. Then how do you handle outliers in your dataset. Then two type of inputtings. These are all features in the image. Categorical inputting and their type. Normalization and standardization. We'll see what that means. So we will do a practice question. Let me share this with you. We can take a 5 minute break and then we can get back to it. So it's 3 o 1. Let's come back by 3 o 6. In the meantime if anyone has any doubts any questions, feel free to ask me. If anybody wants to kind of use the restroom or go forward they can do so. You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You Can You You You You Y You Y You You You I You Let's get started. So now we are kind of looking to more columns in our data set and try a few more feature engineering techniques. So till now we have created columns and understood loans. Now let's try to understand more features. So we want to understand about the dependence and loans, it is related to each other. So what do you think if someone has more number of dependence as compared to someone who is less number of dependence, in which case bank would be interested in giving loans. Someone with more dependence or someone with less dependence. Less dependence because that would kind of make sense right. If they are more dependent they might need to spend more money on caring for the dependence or helping the dependence. But if they have less dependence they might not have to spend the money there. So bank might be a little interested in those who have less number of dependence. So we can see the type of values that we have different dependence. No one who, three plus, we are kind of broadened the category like if 45678 whatever it's just kind of K-3 plus. So we will simply replace three plus with an integer three just to make an integer. So I can do the analysis better. So I am doing a replace function because if the string so I can use replace I have just guessing it a three plus with three. Now that you see it's already replaced but the count still says the same. And we have two few points as compared to the other so that's fine. We are also looking at the credit history. Credit history one means good, zero means bad. So if I data set 90 people have bad credit history. So in place. Values are x, y, z and you want to replace z with let's say C. You do D dot replace z with C. If you do not do in place so what will what will find as you will create a copy of this. And then make the changes here in the copy not in the original one. But if you do it in place equal to true it will not make a copy and actually save the changes directly in the original data. Here. That's what in place means. Cool. So we are going to analyze each column's relationship with the target variable wherever it is necessary. Just like that we did in the previous case we were analyzing the relationship between able to pay EMI with loan status. I loan status is my target so I was trying to analyze the relationship between this feature and this target. And we saw that 70% of the cases where the customer was able to pay EMI the 70% of the cases their loan status was yes they were given the loan. And in the previous case it was actually 50 50 where if the person is not able to pay EMI there are 50% chances that they might get a loan and the 50% as they might not give a loan. So in probability if you want to express this you can say probability loan status equal to yes given they're able to pay EMI. It's 70% so 70% chance of someone able to someone being given a loan or loan status being yes if they're able to pay EMI. And in case probability of loan status being why given they are not able to pay EMI. Is roughly if you do percent as we saw. So we're clearly able to see the difference between the two values. So if you are able to pay back the loan you're getting your loan the chances are significantly higher. So this is the relationship between my target value and my feature. We're going to go do the exact same thing for other features as well. For example if you look at credit history I can check. I can go PD dot cross tab your index will be data of credit history. Record directly copy from there. One second. So I'm getting an error only integers like this are Boolean or valedentices. So I'm going to get a data I go around. The guy I look into it why I'm not getting the answer. And for now let's just do a count plot. Interesting data source must be data frame not an empire rate. I see why okay. So I have to rerun this. Yeah there you go. So see just the way I did it for able to pay EMI. Now looking at it can you tell me whether there is a relationship between the loan status and credit history. Looking at the table can you tell me whether there is a relationship between credit history and loan status. Yes why yes. Right see okay. So let's try to kind of calculate the probability of for it. So how do I represent this probability of loan status being yes that means they were given the loan by the bank. So given that they have a good credit history. Good credit history means equal to 1. So how can you calculate that. 378 divided by 378 plus 97. This divided by the sum of the total. 378 divided by 475. So let's say 709.6 let's say 80 percent. On the other hand probability of loan status being yes if their credit history is bad. 7 divided by 89.017 that means 7.8 percent or 8 percent or 8 percent or 8 percent. So you see the difference if your credit history is good you getting a loan there are 80 percent chances. But on the other hand if your credit history is bad you getting a loan is actually this 8 percent chances. So does that mean I have there is a relationship between credit history and loan status. I can say that. So just by the observation yes you can do statistical tests also hypothesis testing to kind of confirm that. You can use chi square test generally chi square test is used for when you have two categorical variables and you want to check dependence. Tiesquate test can be used but even just by looking at it I could clearly see there's a vast difference. Is that clear. So that's what we kind of do while analyzing the data. Now let's look at the missing value percentage. So I'm creating a new data frame just to visualize the missing value percentage. On my first column will be the number of missing values like data. There are lots of will give you the number of missing values. So for each column if I do just this you'll see that you'll have the number of values for each column. So this is a series actually. Panda series similarly this will be another series where I'm kind of dividing this by the length of the data. And then lastly multiplying by 100 also. So see this give me the exact same value but in percentage notation. This will be the percentage value then sorting the data by missing percentage in this ending order. So you see credit history has 8.14% missing values. EMI has 5.6 and so on. So now there can be various strategies to kind of do the missing value imputation. For example here 8% looks like a put around the value. Which we can kind of impute with some other value we'll see which type of values. On the other hand married. Married has just 0.48% or 0.5% missing values. So generally when you have two few missing data points just three data data points. You do not want to waste your time and energy is just imputing those three points. So the best. Method there is to actually drop these three rows. When you remove these three rows your data doesn't get changed effectively. You have 600 plus rows even if you remove three rows it would make a difference. So you simply drop those rows. What if I have 90% missing values then what should I do? Sorry. Drop that. Why? Exactly. So 90% are missing. Imputation is an artificial method right. You are imputing the values artificially. These are not actually actual values. You are using some logic or some intuition to kind of fill those missing values. That might not represent the actual reality. So 90% artificial value creation is actually wrong. You might get very wrong results because 90% of imputation if you do the imputation 90% values are actually artificially created. So it's better to drop that column altogether. So you can remember there's just two rules of thumbs. If number of rows or basically percentage of missing values is very less. By very less I could mean 0.5 or just 1% less than 1% of the data. Drop the rows because it wouldn't make a difference. Just let this 1% of the data in case if the percentage is more than 90% or a very large value more than even 80% large is very large. Not a there's not there's no threshold maybe let's say even 60% of the values more than 60% of the value that actually missing. Then you drop the column. Because it wouldn't make sense reconstructing that information artificially because that might be wrong. If there is no other way no correct way to impute it if you have data from somewhere other source you can bring it because that will be real data. But if you don't have the source for actual data it's better to drop the column because you will be artificially inflating that column. Doesn't make sense. Drop the rows in first case and drop the column in a second case doesn't make sense to everyone yes or no. Any doubts any questions. So that's about imputation sorry handling dropping of the values. Now let's see how you can kind of fill the values where let's say 8% of the case you can still construct it right. If you drop because if you drop the 8% was that might be a significant loss of information. So it's better to kind of figure out the strategy where you kind of impute that. So how do you handle the missing values you categorize them into variable. If it's a numerical variable then some of the techniques can be simply impute the mean median or motor any constant value let's take an example. Let's take an example let's say you have a column column one right and you have values 10 2017. 19 21 missing NAN 24 23 18 you look at this data let's also make this 19. What do you think about this how does this distribution look like to you. How does this distribution look like. Is it too spread. Like is the variance high or into you are variance low. Is the variance high or variance low why. Because values are close to each other no 19 20 just the difference of one 17 20 difference is 2 less again. So the maximum or the range of this is actually 17 minus 24. The maximum difference is actually of 7 data power 7 values. So I can say that the values are close by right close to each other. So in such a scenario you could guess right. If you have to take a guess this value should be somewhere around these values only. So the strategy could be to simply impute with the average you take the average of these values whatever average comes is a simply do the fix it here. So in this scenario where the value are too close to each other and majority of are in the same range. You could kind of figure out you could even take a guess that the missing value would be in similar range or similar type of values. So you could use a average to kind of impute that what about this. What about this in this case what's the difference between the two. What's the difference between the two. The last value look at the last value it's very high now do you think. What should be the right strategy here. Should we do an average replacement. I will become very high because of one ninety right. But still if you have to take a guess what would be your guess about the value range. It should still be somewhere between 17 to 25 because most of the values are in that range. Is this one outlier right one outlier does not kind of make you to take a vast guess or a extremely different. The rest of the values rest of the majority of the values are still kind of in the same range right only one outlier is present. Which metric do you think I can use to impute and. Sorry. Can I do median. What will be the median of this data. Whatever it will be it will be in this range only. So average will be around statistic here because it can get skewed because of this value. But I can still go median because it will roughly give me around 20. 21.20 to whatever which will be very close to the most of the data points. So here I can impute with median. What about this. Let's say this is a categorical column now. What do you think. What should be the missing value. What could be a missing value. What could be this missing value. Why yes. Because majority of that if you look at the data points majority of the data points actually yes only one no exists. So if you have to take a guess by just by probability. Significant like most of the value are actually yes. It might be yes this might could also be yes. So this is what this is the mode of the data right maximum frequencies of yes so you can go with the mode. So these can be some strategies of imputing the missing values. There can be more which you learn in your machine learning module. But these can be some of the strategies doesn't make sense. Doesn't make sense to everyone. Any doubts any questions in this. Let me also look at the chat. Cool. Any questions anyone. If no questions we can start implementing this see how you can actually do that. So there's also theory written you can go ahead and read it. So we'll try to kind of this is the cross tab analysis that we've already done about credit history. Okay one more thing that I can discuss with you. One strategy could be in a case where you're not able to figure out right you're not able to figure out what should the value be. For example. Let it be credit history one one zero zero N A N one zero. Now if you look at this here can you guess what should we put. What value should we impute. Why not zero or any what do you think we should put here. Look at the third column. Both are equally distributed right so you cannot kind of take a guess whatever you guess there are 50% chance of being right 50% chance of being out. So in such scenarios we can go ahead with the third value random value random constant value I can go with two now this wouldn't mean anything actually now but this will signal to your predictive model your model what your model will learn that hey a look rest of the values are zero than one but I can see one two that means this is a specific case or outlier it would be now. It would be a case where actually the value is not actually present but the user of the programmer actually imputed with the random value so either you can go any random value it could be two generally industries where we give with a central value. So this signals that it's actually random value and this value is actually missing. So in such case you can also add a constant value random constant value but wherever the null values are there the same constant value would come. So you see here in credit history what we are doing we're filling the missing values with two or a value where we kind of where guessing might not actually make sense or. So guessing might not be the right approach for example here even if the values are uneven distributed you have a registry of one if I just by looking at the mode if I go ahead with impute the missing with one that could mean you are by default assuming that these people are having good credit history which might be wrong right I might have a bad credit history just because you don't have the data and majority of the customer that does not mean I also have a good credit history. So in that case it could be risky by imputing one or telling my model that hey look this person has a good credit history but I might not actually have it. So in this scenarios are simply again with a random value that could signal that the value is not available. So simple function fill any intuitive it tells you what to fill the any values with so just fill any and this is the value that you want to fill with to any questions in this any doubts any questions anyone. So that's about missing values. Here see for self employed I am doing another constant value called other whether somebody self employed or not so we're putting a constant value at that we don't know. So you see after imputing when you do dot is any dot sum or is null dot sum the value will become zero. Any questions any questions anyone till now. Now let's look at a function that can help me improve. So this is function point simple computer scale on is actually a library called secular this is where you're machine learning what is the simple. Simple imputer is a function that can help you impute values with a strategy. We're taking a random example here just the similar to one that we discussed values are mostly 10 to 20 40 very close 10 to 20 40 50 and one is missing. So very close values. Here mean is actually 20 right so we discussed right where the values are actually close we might kind of impute it with mean value. So now I want to kind of impute with the mean value here so this nann should actually be replaced by 20. So I can use the simple imputer method right this simple imputer function has a parameter strategy. A strategy what there it takes different type of strategies such as mean median most frequent which is more or constant. So here we decided we're going to go ahead with the strategy mean some passing strategy as mean fit transform fit transform says. Apply this strategy. On the data frame. Here the data frame is a we took an example right a so fit transform actually. Apply is a strategy or fits on the data and transforms also does the. Basically apply strategy now you see this value was missing right the sixth value this was nann 0123456 this is actually replaced by 20. So that's how you can do a imputation with the help of simple imputer. Right so this is similar to what you do you should apply in a panda right there was a function apply that is. You learn about this more this function in depth in the ML module when you take machine learning but this is a way to kind of impute. If you want to do it with the mode the strategy should be most frequent you see them. So 10 kind of appears maximum number of times three times four times in fact you can go ahead with the more strategy also that could also make sense. So here you do strategies most frequent and you see this is placed by. But if you're not sure that which value should go ahead with there's a constant method where you can give a constant value here you're feeling with 1000 a constant value. So either you can use dot fill any or you can use this simple imputer which does any competition in the packet and correctly apply it for you. Any doubts any questions in this anyone so pretty straightforward just import the function give the strategy parameter and then apply. This is akin to apply similar to apply. Cool now you can use a for loop for it. So we saw that these columns are missing values numerical but missing values EMI loan amount per year loan amount loan amount term. So I've created a simple imputer object and given the strategy is median so wherever these columns are encountered I'm simply. Including them with the median strategy so across EMI across loan amount I'm simply will be facing with the median value. So once you do that. So you see there are no more missing columns left because every column is actually every value missing values are replaced by the median values. Similarly for categorical we are doing with most frequent or the mode value. Before running this let's see how many values we have missing values we have. So before we have 13 3 and 15 after run this code. Zero so it's a simple for loop I'm treating over the categorical column and simply applying this this strategy of mode on each column and converting it into a data frame. See then no no missing values are present finally every missing values imputed. Any questions in this folks any questions any doubts in the syntax or anything pretty straightforward three lines of course and for for loop that we're using. Now quick quiz. So during EDA EDA stands for exploratory data analysis you notice that the feature age has some missing values. What is an appropriate approach to handle missing data in this feature which code snippet accomplishes this so this this is an example of how you will see the quiz actual quiz also you'll have this kind of question and there will be code snippets that you might have to select which one is actually. So this is the data that you have 12 15 24 blah blah blah now out of the four options which one do you think is the correct one so this is the age column. Out of the available columns out of the available methods which one do you think is the right one. So median is in two options we can see which one why not see. Why not see because he's wrong syntax so in this case why we're going with median because you can see that there are some values like 9886. So median would be the right strategy and the option gives you the right syntax so be option should be the answer and explanation is given in other details you can go ahead and read about it. So this is actually the explanation sorry this should come under the explanation so we're kind of plotting it and seeing that the values are too vast and doing a strategy median could actually work fine so this is the explanation. Cool let's look at the another topic out there treatment before I move on we have some time we can do that any doubts anyone any questions. Any questions at the back at the right. Hello. Okay now let's look at the way how do we address the outliers. So as everyone might be aware outliers are data points that significantly deviate from the rest of the data if you're kind of data is something like this. Right the points that are going away from it might actually be our outliers so generally outliers might not be the right things that you actually feed into a predictive model because they might not represent majority of the population or help your predictive models. So give you a biased estimate because they can skew the value towards themselves so it's always for simple models complex model can still handle that but for simpler models it's wise to kind of remove these right they might not actually represent real scenarios or just corner cases which might even not be a significant amount of customer base so you can exclude them. Now how can we do that any any thoughts have you started how do we remove the outliers. Any thoughts so see I'm doing a box plot for numerical columns. You see applicant income has significant outliers. Co applicant income also has outliers. Lone amount of outliers. Lone amount of is actually full of outliers. Total income has outliers. Lone amount per year of course if loan amount has outliers one of four year would have outliers. How do you treat how do you fix outliers any thought. How does this box plot identify outliers. How does this box plot get these outliers. How did it find how did it identify it's an actual outlier. I can see that the dots are outlier but how did it decide whether a data point should be a dot or it should be a line. Vision I could how. So you might have studied I think we have discussed this in the past also if a data point is actually beyond this range. If it's outside this range. Then it's considered an outlier if it is less than this value then it's an outlier if it's more than this value then it's an outlier. So here all the points that you're seeing on the right side are actually more than Q3 or the third quartile plus 1.5 times IqR. If the value is greater than this then it considers it as an outlier. So now my goal is to get a remove these data points. How do I do that. If I have to remove these data points how do I do that. Any thoughts. Think logically I've given you the formula how will you remove that. That's all I'll create that these two threshold values right if the values beyond this then it's an outlier if the values below this then it's an outlier. So I can say upper limit. I can create two upper two values upper limit and lower limit upper limit will be your Q3 plus 1.5 iqR. Lower limit. Q1 minus 1.5 iqR. So if then I can simply say DF of whatever column that I'm applying these two. Don't apply. There can be multiple things we'll see how we have implemented it. So if the value is more than this or less than this then we simply exclude them. Let's see how we have done that here. So as an interquartial range method. First I'm calculating the interquartial range for that I'm using the quantile function 0.25. Quantile means give the of 0.25 means 25 percentile or the first quartile. Do you know the difference between these two like percentile and quantile? Percentile versus quantile. Percentile is between 0 to 100. This is between scale 1 0 to 1. So if you have to talk about the Q1 in terms of percentile is 25 percentile but quartile is 0.25. So basically it's divided by 100. So I'm taking out the first quartile 0.25 Q1 and similarly Q3. IqR as we discuss it's Q1 minus Q3 minus Q1. I'll do it for every column. Then this is the formula that I'm applying for. Let's see. Let me break this down. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Let's see what's happening here. So I am saying if what is dfNum? dfNum is actually these. This thing. dfNum is your only the numerical columns. Applicant only the numerical columns. So if the values in dfNum is actually less than this value Q1 minus 1.5 into iqR. See Q1 is actually 25 percentile. Continue percentile of each column. Q1 minus 1.5 multiplied by iqR. So these are the respective thresholds for each column. For each column I have the thresholds. So if the data is less than this threshold or alternatively it's more than this threshold. Not any means any of the value. I call the column as it is what means it's all the column. If any such value is present in these range then you give me the value true. That means both are satisfied. Either of them are satisfied. You give a value of true. What does this mean? Sorry. Negate. So that means if the condition is true and if I negate the true what do I get? False. Right? So that means you get only the true values. Wherever these condition is not satisfied that is not an outlier. If it's false what does that mean? It's not an outlier right? So negation of false is actually true. So I'm only left with these two values which are non outliers. Is this clear? Is the syntax clear? Will you be able to deduce this on your own? Any questions in this? Look at it carefully if there is any doubt please ask. No questions? Let me also quickly do a small workout for you also. So if I say DFNAM is less than this. See I see false false false false true true true. Right? If I do a negation all the false would become wherever there are false it will become true. And when I do a data of it I would get only basically values there where it's actually true. I will try to do this but any. So see I'm only left with those data points where it's actually true. False false false. Simply wherever true is there you get those access. Those roles. Now you can combine the two and we get the same result but for the two conditions. So the explanation is also given in the notebook when you revise it you can directly go through it. So it's everything is in detail in this book. So revising when you revising just go through the notebook you should be good for the whole session. One more strategy can be Z score. Have you learnt about Z score before? Where did you study it? Did you study it in many were learning normal distribution? So what does Z score of three mean? Right? So Z score of basically minus three to three means that the data lies between plus minus three standard deviations. Anything beyond this is actually considered as an outlier. Yes because around life more than 99% data. More than 99% of the data lives between plus minus three standard deviations or a Z score of three. So if any Z score value is beyond this range we can consider it as an outlier. So that's the same logic that we're going to implement. But note that this is generally helpful when your data is actually normally distributed. If the data is not normally distributed this might not be the correct way. But for showing I'll still show you. So I'm importing a library called scipy scipy scientific python. So all the statistical and advanced mathematical functions are present in this. From within scipy I'm importing another library called stats. Stats have all your statistical function like Z score. Right? Scipy dot stash dot Z score will give me the Z score for the loan amount. To call them loan. Right? It will give me Z scores for that. If these these scores are beyond the minus three plus three range. We'll remove that. So I'm using a numpy dot where. If any case where the Z score is less than minus three. So I'll remove that. And I'll also remove where it's beyond plus three. And finally. So I'm looking at the length of it. So there are no outliers with less than minus three because when I do this input or where I get no rows. So that means no data point is actually having less than minus three. But there are significant number of data points that are having more than three. It's their index. This is these are index values row number one thirty row number one fifty five. So I'm taking the plus addition of that. So there are fifteen data points in. Fifteen outliers in which column. Lone amount. Fifteen outliers in the loan amount column. So we will remove that. So wherever these conditions are not true. We're going to keep only those. Don't amount. Is this clear? So select all those which do not satisfy the condition because of the negation. Exploration in beta is written here so whenever you revise it it's always there. But any questions in this. Any questions anyone. Cool. So you see after removing the. Z score outliers we'll have it five ninety eight points. Originally it was six one four. Similarly we can do it for every column. After removing outliers I'm left with five forty one data points across all the columns. Previously I just removed from loan amount that's whether five ninety nine. But when I remove from all the columns I'm finally left fifty four five forty one data points. So how do you decide which outlier treatment. So the risk of a set is generally ideal when you have a normal distribution or the data symmetric on the other end of the data is not symmetric. You can go ahead with the interquartal range. Some more theoretical information about CLT and outliers you can read about it. Quick quiz you did a set with the following values after applying the IQ or method for outliers which values will be considered outliers. Out of the four options which one do you think is correct. Which one are the outliers. Why. Why seventy five and two hundred. So just by looking at it you cannot comment see the question ask you IQ or method should have to apply it. So this is the data you have. You apply the IQ or method see as I mentioned in umpiders percentile function in pandas is quarterile function. But the concept is same so you calculate the q one. You calculate the q three you calculate the IQ are you calculate the upper bound you calculate the lower bound and simply check if the data if the value is below the lower bound or above the upper bound. So your lower bound is actually minus five and upper bound is sixty seven so anything beyond this range. So is there any value that is less than minus five year. But are there value which are more than sixty seven. So there are two values seventy five and two hundred. So these will be your outliers. Is that clear. Cool. So we are left with a small part related to encoding let's also quickly discuss this and then we can wrap it. So you have categorical data right. So this is important. What type of categorical data do you see dependence married gender. Self employed property. These are categorical variables right. Now tell me how many of these are actually ordinal categorical variables. How many are these they are ordinarily ordinal categorical variables. Is dependence ordinal. Ordinal is categorical variables that have order. I think we have discussed in the part past. So categorical columns as two types one is nominal. One is ordinal. Ordinal where there is an order good better best. This is an order right best is better than better and better is better than good. So this has an order right classes first class second class third class. First is lower than second and lower. So there's an order here rankings one two three four five ratings one two three four five. No, we know where there's no order male female. We cannot say that any is more or less than the other right. So this can be nominal. So wherever there's an order that's an ordinal wherever this order is not there. So there's no for example income bin income bin as medium average. Let's say we have low medium average high. So this has an order right. So this is ordinal. For example self employed self employed is yes or no. Yes common. So there's no order out of it right. Yes is better than no you cannot say that or no is better than yes. So there's no order in more. So this is an ordinal so whenever you have. Ordinal data point or ordinal categorical column. You use something that is label encoding right. Very simply encoded with actual count value or actual range value. For example low can be encoded as zero medium one average to hiring high three. You can do that in case you have a nominal you can do one hot encoding. So one hot encoding means you can create two columns out of it like you have yes no. So you can create a. Two columns out of it yes and no wherever this yes the value of yes will be one and the value of no will be zero because yes is present. And wherever there will be no you can represent it size this way. Is it here? If I give you a question a b c d these are your categories. How will you convert this into one hot encoding? How will you represent this is one hot encoding? Let's say row number one row number two row number three row number four. This is a says b this is c this is d. How will you represent this as one hot encoding? Yes so you will create four columns out of it column a. Column that represents b column that represents c column that represents d. So since a is present this is one rest of zero since b is present b is one rest of zero since c is present. Rest of zero since d is present rest of zero. So this will be the one hot encoding representation of. Good question. So why am I doing this in the first place that's the question like what's the point? So the problem with machine learning models is your machine learning models traditional ML models are not the LLM's like charge equity and things like that that you use even for them also. They cannot understand text. A machine learning model cannot understand text or string values. You need to convert it into some form of numerical representation even with your LLM's or large language models you while claiming them you convert your data the numerical data into a numerical representation which is called embeddings will read you learn more about in your upcoming years but think. Learn about this that machine learning models cannot directly understand text even your computer cannot understand text if you have studied about basics of the computers. Low level your text is converted into binary systems right zero and one which is machine readable so your machine learning world who cannot understand text. So some convert them into numerical representation in such a way that your text is actually a right form of representation of that number or a number is the right representation of that text. So now how do you tell your machine learning model that for this row is actually present just by telling it creating four columns. So you can tell it that there are okay four possible values and one and zero tells you that hey look only this is present rest are absent. Similarly for B and similarly for C and D is that clear. In case you have this type of value where a simple order is present you can clearly say high high is better than. That is that high what is happening. Anyway you can say that high is better than lower right or high is better than average so three is more than zero three is more than one so that will signal to the model that hey this value is higher than the previous value so that's the logic that's the rational behind converting into numerical representation. So let's look at target encoding. Another way to kind of represent could be target encoding for example. Let's look at this. Let's assume for now instead of zero and one instead of zero and one simply credit history means bad and good right so one way to represent this or one way to encode this is actually by taking the help of your target variable. So you can say wherever the loan state we discuss or wherever the loan status credit history is good point it or 80% of the chances the loan being yes and 8% here. So you can represent this you can encode this good by this probability also point 8 and 0.0. So now your bad is actually replaced with point 0.08 good is replaced with point 8 now this will tell your model that wherever this good occurs or wherever this point 8 occurs the chances or the values of loans it is being yes is actually higher. So this is known as target encoding where you use the target to encode the categorical variables. Is that clear? So now I will quickly implement these again the notebook has plenty of examples when you will read it you will understand better. So see how to implement that this is the important part so in a scalar again the cycle library is a function called a label encoder we just saw 01234. So you can directly use the label encoder function and do a fit transform again apply apply the label encoder to which column loan status so it converts into 0 and 1. You can clearly check one represents why and 0 represents no if had there been a third category that would have become 2 if there would have been 4. So it goes in order similarly you can do it for gender, marriage and education by applying it but we will also see how you can apply one ht encoding for that. See here we have semi urban rural urban here also we can do 012 this can be 0 this can be 1 this can be 2. We will also see target encoder so I mean installing the function called there is a library called category encoders here the function target encoder lives so I am importing that look here this is a good example. This is the normalized version so look wherever your property is rural the chances of you getting alone is actually less 63% in fact wherever your property is actually semi urban. The chances of getting alone is higher 79% and then it is for urban so here the goal is to kind of replace urban with this value semi urban with this value and rural with this value that's what category encoder will do. See I am creating the object of target encoder and simply doing the fit transform now you see these probability values are present. Now you look instead of the raw values these have been replaced so this 79.77 would represent semi urban 63 would represent rural and 67 would represent. So this is what target encoding is and that's how you can implement it so you create a target encoder object we are calling it tea you can call whatever you want and then simply do a fit transform on the column you want to apply. Is that clear any doubts anyone so again explanation is written when you revise it you can apply it for rest of the column so just by the same logic. You can apply it depends on the same thing copy pasting it on rest of them you will see that it will get replaced by the probabilities. So that's about encoding lastly this normalization standardization pretty straightforward you can read about it again touch upon this in the next class as well. You can read about it and then we can discuss what actually these means it simply means bring it into one scale but we'll discuss this in the next class. About normalization and standardization I don't want to take it beyond that because it's already four and you have some assignments to do. Before I call it off is there any questions any doubts. Any doubts anyone cool so do revise what you're saying till now because this will come in your exam or quiz last part we can touch upon in the next class but it's pretty straightforward even when you read it you will understand what we're talking about here but we'll touch upon it in the next class. So there are no questions let's let me unlock your assignments. So you should have them.