you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you out to you out to you your to you I believe everyone of you has done but instead of having the classical Merced Sword, we will see how multi-threaded Merced Sword works. At this, we might not be able to cover today itself but I will give you the impution of it. Now, before we get started, we will have a quick revision from Concurrency 1. Now, we saw that how process was a dynamic program, right? Process was a dynamic program and work used to happen over there, okay? So if I have any program, okay, the moment you run, it became process and you used to submit this process to the CPU for execution and who was scheduling it? The scheduler or rather the oversheduler was scheduling this, we know this, okay? But in the previous class, we learned that how process itself is just a container, okay? Process is a container, it has resources, it has code, it has memory and everything but it does not actually perform the task itself rather it has something that is known as threads which are going to actually perform the work, okay? So thread is the smallest unit of execution inside a process. Now your processes can have single thread also, it can have multi-thread also. Up until you create a new thread, only one thread is going to work in a program and that is known as the main thread, this is what we have learned. Once I create something like this, like here you see the program of thread creation, couple of things to understand while you are also, we all have learned how to create tasks with runnable interface, okay? So create any tasks that we want to and implement the runnable interface which will provide you the run function and then you in turn can go and give the implementation of this run function which will help you create print task as a task. Then when you come to main you create an object of this task and when you want this task to run separately on a new thread which was not previously available, you can go ahead and create a thread as well. So thread is a class, pre-defined in Java, you simply have to create objects using it. So thread T1 is equal to new thread, so T1 is the thread object and you see that right now task is being provided to this T1 for execution, okay? Right now when I am writing new thread, the thread does not start automatically, rather we will say only a thread object is created and when I write T1 dot start, this is when a thread actually comes into picture and is going to start itself. Here, clearly see that start is what starts a new thread, okay? The new keyword is not starting a new thread, it is simply creating a thread and then the interface runnable is going to represent this task, okay? Then what is going to happen over here? We create the task object, we create the thread with this task object and call start, JVM starts a new thread and then once you are passing it to my thread, the run function of the task is going to execute and finally give you the output, okay? That is what happens. So runnable is a task, thread is the worker and start is where you begin the execution of a new thread, is that clear? These are the basics of threads, any doubts up till this point? We will do a small quote also, rather, okay? I will show it here, it is the moment. So you see here, I have simply got the same code as in the document, okay? So the current task is simply a task which we are going to implement, then I want to check where is this task running, okay? When I want to check this, I can write thread dot current thread dot get name, okay? So this task in whatever thread it is going to run, it will just show the name of it. Then you have name, okay? Inside this main, I create the task object, I create the thread object and then I write T1 dot start, okay? I will quickly show you what is the difference when we run with using a thread, okay? So here it is write something, main task is running, okay? Inside. So whenever I do not create any thread, suppose I don't do any of this, okay? I do, I have not done anything, I have simply written, may, and inside may I am checking in which thread it is running. Up until now see whenever you write a normal program, okay? Carve it, come to your question, just give me a moment, okay? We have done, a runnable interface was done in the revesting groups, I guess, right? The enable interface is a simple interface with only one function, the function is run, okay? So it does not have any implementation, it is a normal abstract function, okay? So coming back to it, you have written so many Java programs but never you have created your own thread, okay? Now when you run this program, you see what is being printed? Main task is running inside main, okay? Which means that the thread name in which this main is running is known as main itself. So when you don't create a thread of your own, Java provides you a default thread, that thread is known as the main thread. Which you can see right now this main function is running inside the main thread. Now what do I do if I write print task object has been created and the thread has been created, okay? And I run this. Let me write T1.run, okay? Now you see when I am simply calling the run method of my task T1.run, what is happening? We are printing task inside is running the main thread only. So both the functions are running in the same thread, the main thread. But now I want to change this and I want to make sure that both the functions run on different threads, so I will write T1.start. And as I run this, you will be able to observe that the main function is running inside the main thread and the task is running inside the thread zero. This is the basic of what we have learnt in the previous class. Now tell me are there any doubts over here? Any doubts? Great, okay. Whatever codes we write will be available at the end of the class. I am going to launch a couple of quizzes, okay? These are revision quizzes from the previous class. So go ahead and answer them. All the best? See this code and try to answer the next set of questions. So see, runable is always going to represent the task which is going to run inside something, okay? Thread does not have automatic execution and creation. Please answer the next one. Remember that new is going to create the thread object. New is going to create the thread object. Start is going to start the thread. And the run function is a normal function which is written inside the task itself. So run is going to execute from the task. It has no connection with the odd thread. Answer the next one. Create, OS scheduler is always going to be the one, should use the process or the thread. Okay? Now, my next question to you is that we just saw the code to create one thread. Can you similarly create 100 threads? Tell me. Right now we are saying that one thread can do one task. Okay, in the previous class we also saw how can we can create multiple threads to make sure all the tasks are being given to different threads. But now tell me if you have 100 small tasks coming to your system, are you going to create 100 threads? Is that a good idea? No. Why no? I just like this. Okay, apart from that? Because of that. Okay, why? Correct. CPU is already latency will increase, a batch right? Okay, so we will write a small program right now. Okay, and see how 100 threads can be created manually. And then we see the problem with it. Okay, so here I am just going to change the class. This is request task. Okay, this will have one attribute that requests. Okay, the request number rather let me write request number. I am going to make a constructor right now with the request number. It is taught request number is equal to request. Okay, so creating a simple class, so get this attribute. So going to run in the exact same manner, we'll just say request and then write the number also. This is request number. Okay. So we are saying request and then get the request number is running inside whatever thread that created here. There's no need for this. And right now I was creating the task and thread like this. I am going to just put it inside a loop. Nothing else will change in I is equal to zero. I less than 100 and I plus plus. Okay, so we are creating an object of request task every time. Request task. This is also request task. Okay. So thread new thread creation. Yeah, that is it. Okay. One plus. What is happening? I am not passing. Pass the I number also is expecting one input next everything is fine. Okay, so you see what is happening every time a new task is being created it is being given to a new thread. Which means if hundreds of tasks are coming in 100 new threads are being created as you can see in live action. Okay, I just go through the code again just to show you what exactly is happening. What happened? Just a second. Just a second. So see what is happening over here. This is a simple request task class which I have in this I am providing request numbers so that I can check which request is running. And I am checking in which thread it is running in main I just create 100. Talk about the task 100 number of times. Okay, I'm passing. So although my work is being done, you see how much context switching is happening. Because every thread is running an independent task. Okay, so we already know what are the problems with so much context switching. Okay, and we also know that once we create a thread some amount of resources are required. Even if the resources are small, we still need them. Okay, so you see that there are a couple of problems with so much thread creation. First of all, thread creation is never free. Okay, like creation of a process was never free. Okay, we had to create some memory. We had to give it some resources. All of that was happening. Okay, similarly each thread is going to have a thread object creation which means some memory will be acquired. It will have its own stack memory. Okay, where all the data is stored like PCB. It will have all the scheduling information. It will have some of the OS resources. So a lot of, I can say overhead has been increased when I have so many threads. Similarly, because of so many threads being there, the context switching will also increase. And you all were very well that context switching is nothing but a waste of time if it is not done correctly. Because your CPU is always active, but it is not exactly running all the processes. Next, when we create so many threads, memory consumption also increases. Which is not a good thing because this is not useful as of now. Okay, and imagine thousands of requests are coming your way. And in real life scenario in real system, you have millions of requests coming your way. So for all the million requests, will you create millions of threads? Will it not overload the system? It is definitely going to overload the system. Okay, and it is very difficult to create the threads also. You have seen how we have to write the new keyword to thread creation. Pass a task to it and then we have to manually start it as well by writing t1.start. If I don't start it, the thread will not run. Even if you have created a thread object, you will say tracking of all these threads. At what position this thread is at currently. Okay, so too many threads are going to become a hassle for you. And in real life application, manual creation is not going to work. Okay, it is good for learning purpose, but it is not going to work. So what do we use instead? We use something known as the thread pool. And thread pool is something which we will be discussing in detail in today's class. Any doubt as of now? Any doubt in the problems what we have? Yes, correct. Okay, so I will show you a quick diagram of a thread class. So if you have the thread class, thread class will have a couple of things. It will have the start method. Okay, it will have the get name method. Okay, and inside the start method, it has the run method. Okay, so quick check over here. You just saw that we were using the get name function to get the name of the thread. Right. Similarly, start function that you have. See what is inside start. Start says run. And this run does not have any implementation. Rather it says do not run my function. Go to your task. Okay, because the task will also have a run function. Okay, so the start function of the thread says that now the thread will start working. How it is going to run the run function of my task. That is what happens internally. Okay. So hence you have to manually start otherwise it will not run. That's all. Okay, please answer the next one. Perfect. So here. The biggest issue right now is that the memory usage is going to increase. And you are going to have a system overhead because of so much thread creation and context switching as well. Okay, answer the next one. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Great. So there is definitely going to be a system overload. If you create so many threads because you will have to manage each and every one of them. And the system will eventually collapse. Answer the next one. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Great. Too many threads will increase CPU overhead because you will have a lot of context switching happening. Okay. Copying the data of the thread which is running currently or the process running currently. I'm reloading the data of a new thread or process. Okay. Okay. Okay. So source code whatever is available in the process the heat memory which is available in the process is actually shared by the thread. Okay. It is shared by the thread and thread is going to have its own stack memory. Okay. Last one and then we will move on to thread pool. Okay. So create one thread per task is not a very good idea. You will lose control over the system. Okay. Because you do not know which thread is being created which task is being created given to this thread did that thread finish properly all that thing has to be maintained. So instead of this we will now move on to thread pool and for thread pool I will ask you a simple question. Imagine you went to a restaurant okay and if 10 people are there or 10 I can say customers are there you have 10 waiters but if suddenly there's a certain you have 100 customers is the restaurant going to hire 100 customers 100 waiters immediately absolutely not. Same thing happens with threads also. So in the restaurant you can see that these waiters are always fixed in numbers and you can think of it as threads. The customer orders which you get are like task and the order queue is the task queue and then the manager is the executor function which is providing you the threads. So the manager or the executor service we will discuss about this in much more detail they provide you with threads. Okay. Thread should be limited in number no matter how many orders come in they will have to wait in the queue. Okay. After waiting in the queue what happens that the threads or the waiters are going to pick up orders or tasks from this queue. Okay. So what is happening task is going to arrive it is going to wait in the queue whichever waiter or whichever thread is available next is going to pick up the task from this task queue and once the waiter is free now you are able to reuse the waiter and this is a much better example isn't it. Okay. So why thread pool is better according to this example tell me why is thread pool better. Thread pool is nothing but it is group of already created reusable threads instead of creating new thread for a great task we are reusing the existing ones. Right. So tell me why do you feel like it is better. Think about it tell me the answer is also right here. A bearish star right in manual thread creation you had to create the thread every single time you had to keep a trap on when the task is available you had to pass the task with thread as well. And there was a chance that you were able to create multiple threads which led to more overhead multiple threads became hard to manage also and there was a system overload also. But in the thread pool we are easily reusing all the threads you can keep a count of how many threads are there and keeping track of limited number of threads will also be easier. Much lesser overhead easier to manage and better control over the system as well. So thread pool is nothing but it is a set of threads already given to you by the executor service. It will have a task queue and it will provide you a better control over all the threads. And that is why manual thread creation is never a good idea it is always better to use the predefined thread pool. Any doubt anyone? Any doubt? Yes no please tell me. Two simple quizzes please answer. Great, a thread pool contains multiple reusable threads. Next one. Perfect. So even if all the threads are available, they are supposed to wait in the task queue. Now tell me how many of you this is another diagram which you can see. So thread pool will also always have a capacity you can fix how much capacity do you want to have. Incoming tasks are always in the queue thread pool will pick up a task from the queue. It will process the task and it will then release the thread back to the thread pool and then all the completed tasks are going to go out. That is all what happens. Now do you all know what is an API? Yes tell me what is an API? So let us take a small example. You all have e-commerce websites. Take an example of Zomato. Now if you are using Zomato you will see a Google Maps API over there. Is that particular map given by Zomato itself? Not really. It is simply going to request a service from Google Maps and I want to use this functionality of yours. Similarly when you have Swig Eats, Swig Eats has a payment API also. Now payment API helps you process the payment. Does that mean all the elements in that payment page are being designed by Swig E itself? No. It is going to take help of Google Pay Cred or the other payment applications. Similarly you can see that API does not mean anything but application programming interface. It is simply going to provide you a way to help two software programs talk to each other. If someone wants better data what will happen? Will your Java program directly go and access the weather data? No. It is not going to do that because this is not following the data isolation property which we have seen. So this data is protected by these applications. Now what our Java program will do? It is simply place a request. This request is the weather API and the weather API will communicate this request and provide a response to your Java program. That is what the basic work of API is. You can also think of like if you go to a restaurant you even if the food is cooked in the restaurant, you are not picking up the food yourself. The waiter is giving you the food. That is what basically API is doing. Taking your request and giving our response to your request. That is all. So API is nothing but it provides you a bridge among different softwares that you have. Next comes executor service. Or the executor framework. Have you all heard of what a framework is? Tell me. What is a framework? Let me say a couple of questions first. If the API is not the OS, it is just an interface. It just provides you rules through which the components can communicate. We have one more question. The question is CPU over heading in a slow context, switching waste time and memory. I am thread pooling task but always waiting in the queue. Will it also take some more time? Hence can we say that thread pooling is only saving memory. Again you see over here. This does not happen exactly. Thread pooling is going to save you both time and memory. If you notice when we were doing questions on CPU scheduling, we noticed how completion time was the actual work. Not the actual work rather. The completion time was the burst time plus the waiting that you were having. If you remove the waiting completely, everything is running individually. Not just we are assigning separate threads to everyone. We are managing that thread. That is the first overhead. Creating memory, creating the thread itself is overhead. Although it has a task queue but nothing about it, threads are nothing but sub-processes or sub-task which are itself very small. So it would not take that much time for you to simply wait and get your task done as compared to creating a full thread and then switching with the threads. That is the main issue. I hope I answered your question. Again, as we move on to thread pool, we will also learn about something known as shutdown of the entire thread pool. You will see how that also decreases the wait time. Next coming back to framework. Now tell me what is the framework? Any idea? What is the framework? Any idea? The cover said it is some kind of period and code. What about the others? It is definitely some pre-built data or code that you have. Whenever I actually want to do some task, I can build on top of it instead of starting from scratch. It is going to provide you a setup which you can use to create your task. One of such frameworks is executor service. Now what all will the executor service provide us? Now as I said, you can define how many threads are available in the thread pool. But are you going to exactly write the code for creation of thread pool? If you want to do it, you are not going to. Then you might want to submit the task to the thread pool for execution. But what exactly happens in submit? Are you going to care about that? No. Similarly, which thread has become free? How to store the result? How to shut down or how to stop taking requests? All of these things are something that should be available in the setup. Once we write the multi-threaded programs, we are just concerned by creating the logic of the program and submitting it to the thread pool. If we have to care about everything, then we would rather just use the manual thread creation and the thread class. Executor is a framework or it is a Java API which is basically used to have managing of threads. It helps you create thread pools. It helps you submit the request. It helps you reuse all the threads and it is going to control the shutdown of that particular thread as well. It is going to be a part of java.util.concurrent. Whenever you are going to write multi-threaded programs, you will have to include this as well. Any doubt as of now? This executor framework has a couple of things which are very important. First of all, it is executor service. Executor service is an interface and it is the most useful one out there. It is going to manage everything about your task. It is going to manage how threads are created, how we are reusing, how we are controlling the thread, everything. Next, you have executors. Executors is like a very simple class. It only has a couple of functions to help you create the thread pool. So, thread creation you can say happens with the help of executors. It is a very simple class whereas managing of the threads happens in the executor service. I will provide you a very clean way to see how the tasks are being submitted, how they are being processed and how we are being eliminated. Next, you already know about runnable. And, runnable is an interface. Now, when do we use runnable? Whenever we want to say that our task will be run. That is when we use runnable but you have notice that the return type of this runnable or the run function is always wide. Have you guys ever tried to make this int and try? Int run? No. Even if you try to, it will give you error. Why will it give you error? Because in the runnable interface the run method is defined as a wide type function. So, if you try to give it a return type, it will not accept and throw a compilation error. But not every program can simply print. It might have to return back something as well. So, when you want the result back from the program, you are going to use the callable interface. Works exactly like runnable but now instead of simply printing results, we will be able to return the result back. Next, we will see future. Future is also very interesting. We will discuss about this in detail. And it represents that whatever result is being calculated by your thread will be available in the future. So, all these things are very, very essential whenever we write multi-threaded programs, every single one of them will be used. Just a quick check. Runnable, callable both are interfaces, nothing different. Callable does not return a result because it is wide type. Whereas, the callable will have a call function which has a return type. And hence, you can return data from here. Also, throwing a hybrid of exception handling in Java. Yes, no. Exceptional handling, throwing catching errors, no right? So, up until now, runnable could not provide you throwing of exceptions. You can write separate, try catch block, block and complete it. But it does not provide exception handling. Whereas, callable is going to provide exception. Just give me one moment, blood do you? Yeah. So, I was saying that callable can throw exceptions also. We will see this in detail in the next couple of slides. And yeah, that is pretty much how that thread pool is going to work with the help of submission of task, task queue, thread pool which has all the workers, execute the task and then reuse it. And all of this we will see in the next couple of programs. Shubha, you can come now. So, we will be holding this session by the people in campus. Let's check in on our screen. This part, we can be very open. So, there is this thing. Thank you. You Coming back to executor service and fixed thread pool. So, write here if I write executors.newfixedthreadpool. And then I pass three to it. Now, what does this line mean? Executor service is the one used to submit the task to the thread pool. As of now, are these submitting any task? No. We are simply creating a thread pool. For creation of thread pools, what do I need? Executors. So, executors.newfixedthreadpool will create a fixed thread pool of three threads at the moment. You can change this number and create as many threads as you want to. Now, if I submit 10 tasks, if I go ahead and submit 10 tasks, then also what will happen? These three threads are the ones which are going to pick up the task. Rest will be remaining in the waiting queue for their turn. Is that clear, everyone? Is this clear, any doubt? Please check and then we move on to a small program to show how this creation works. Any questions? Please remember there is a clear distinction between executors service and executors. Extremely essential. Shall we move on? So, now we will see how to create this thread. So, in order to use the executor service, remember what do you have to include concurrent? So, import java.utril.concurrent and then I will include the executor service. And I will also include executors. Next, the same task will be created. Requests task implements runable as of now. Then request task has a constructor which takes the task number. It has a run function as in hard as usual. And then you see that I am simply printing that what is the thread which has picked this task up. Then in main is what the difference will be. So, here I am not going to create 100 threads. Let us do something different. So, here I am going to write executor service. Exitutor service, I am naming this executor itself. The object is executor. And equal to I will write executor dot new fix thread pool. And this thread pool is going to be having three threads as of now. Please see carefully, executor service is the one with which I am going to create the reference variable which is executor. Executors is what is going to create the thread pool. New fix thread pool indicates a fixed size thread pool of size three will be created at the moment. Now, I want to submit all the tasks. So, this is the one loop which will be creating again. So, I am equal to zero. I want to submit suppose 10 tasks at the moment. So, what will I write executor dot submit. So, you take the executor service reference variable do dot submit and whatever task you write now will be submitted to the thread pool that you have. And then inside this you are going to create the object of the task that you have. So, I am going to be passing new request task and pass the variable I so that the request gets a number. So, this is how all the tasks will be submitted to the thread pool. Now, once I again run executor dot shutdown the executor is going to do something which we will be discussing in a bit. As of now any doubts here any doubts in what we have written any questions please check the code and tell me. Exact same thing as the previous one the only differences like we are not creating threads manually rather we are calling the executor service to create threads for us in a fixed pool. So, now you see 10 tasks are being created previously if I was creating 100 threads manually every single task would get a new thread. So, you see how we are reusing the threads at the moment request 1 is being 100 by thread 2 it is available in pool 1 then request 0 is being 100 by thread 1 and so on. Once the task is completing you are reusing the threads that you have any doubt in this any doubts at the moment. Please ask in case you have any questions. It is off sequential. See if I eliminate the thread then it will become sequential because everything will run on the main thread only. But right now object creation is happening object creation happens in the main thread but the object is being sent to a new institution path which is the thread itself. Any other doubts here please check this is mainly to understand how reusing of threads is happening and as you see this is one pool that you have created you can create multiple such pools and have different threads over there also. Now two important functions that we use but we did not discuss one is submit the other one is shut down. So, submit to is very clear whenever you want to submit a task to the thread pool so that any of the threads can go ahead and pick it we are going to use submit. So, here we write executor dot submit new request I this new request I is the task that you have I submit it to the thread pool the executor chooses our current thread and the worker thread is going to pick up the task and start performing whatever it wants to do after completion my thread is free and it can again pick up any task whatever it wants to is a submit function clear. So, submit is giving a task to the executor next is the shutdown function now lot of people confuse shutdown function and think that it is going to completely terminate the thread pool but that is not what happens. executor shutdown simply says that now whatever requests are available to me I will be assigning all the threads to those requests only I am not going to accept any new request now I guess I will ask that still a lot of processes will be waiting in the queue but think about it when executor shutdown happens executor is not accepting any new request it means the request it really breaks the flow when someone is passing by like that. I was telling you that if the shutdown happens I do not accept any new thread which means a new task and the task is not spending its time in the waiting queue and that is how the overall waiting time is also reduced that's it. So, the time you see is also being managed with the help of shutdown shutdown will not terminate the thread pool it is simply saying that I have ample amount of task right now and all my threads are busy working on those tasks so I am not going to accept any new task that's it. And then everything else remains the same the threads are executing and the shutdown is helping you finish everything that is it. Any doubt on this any doubt we are not doing after every loop here again this is a sample program right now I have 10 simple requests so I am shutting down after the loop. If you had multiple different requests then you might want to place an if condition saying that if the task number is greater than 10 then shut down and then you go okay that is how it is going to happen this is simple program just to understand what happens that is it. Any problem as of now so again too many threads are not waiting. The executor is assigning every thread to every task and everything is going to run smoothly. If there are no more doubts we will take up a few quizzes again. Please remember executor is the class and new fixed thread pool is the function or the method which creates the new thread pool it says that there has been a thread pool created. And as of now it has three clips you can go ahead and change this as well answer the next one. Summit is simply going to submit task to the thread pool. Last one. So shut down will simply stop accepting new threads or so new task and finish the ongoing or the submitted task. Remember how we said that they can be multiple threads or thread pools created. So shut down will also help you manage the task is going to which particular thread pool as well. So you saw a clear distinction between manual thread creation and your thread pool manual thread creation was very difficult because you had to create everything start everything and then run it. One thread per task was being created okay it was very hard to handle and definitely overhead also it is simple to do though it is very simple to understand exactly how threads work. So we move on to executor service which is going to have this automatic pool which manages everything for you and the only thing that you should be worried about is submitting task to the thread pool and shutting down. So it is going to be much better so going forward whatever program we write will be using the executor service for now. Great this brings us please stop talking. This brings us to the next thing we have been using run able to create new task and it was pretty easy to do as well. But now you will go and learn about generics which is soluble in fact okay so now tell me do you all know what generics is. Tell me what is generics. Any idea? So you all know what are list is right. How do you create an are list are a list and then you if suppose I want to create an integer type are a list I will write integer give a name to the are list equal to new are a list right this is what you do. Yes it means include. Now if I do Al dot add and then add a number 10 what will happen 10 will be added similarly if I add Al dot add 20 20 will be added. Let me print also. So 10 20 have been added now instead of doing that suppose I also write Al dot add and then I pass hello now what will happen. You will see error right why is this error happening at the moment. We have defined that the type of our are a list is integer type and hence I cannot mix my leader types over there but what if I remove this integer from. Have you guys ever tried doing this create are a list without any type. So right now what do you think will happen will I get an error. I should I get a error as per whatever you have learned you should get error right but let's see what happens. You are able to create an are a list which has both integer data and string data it means it is a mixed type integer is mixed type are a list now. Should that be happening it shouldn't be happening because then every single element will have to be 100 in a different way. So this integer that you write over here or any data type that you write for that matter this is not compulsory but rather you are giving a box to this a list and saying that this is a generic material which you need to use integer is a type which you will be accepting going forward. And that is how you make sure a data is not getting mixed. So, generics is nothing but this integer box which you created or the string box which you create this is generics it tells you what kind of data something can accept is that clear everyone. Now, when I have runable runable is very simple. Okay. Runable and your simply void run that's it that's all what happens. But again the major problem is that here the return type is void as return type is void I cannot return anything that's it. It is simply going to help you print the values nothing else yes or no does not return any value the program will not get the answer back. So, in some cases we might need the answer back what can we do in those cases in those cases instead of using runable will create the task using callable. Okay. Callable is like runable it is an interface but the thing here is that it can return back or result. So, you will have callable and it will have a function call and it is of integer type public integer call. Okay. So, integer call now means that I will be able to return integer type results is that clear everyone. Okay. With the help of this generic we were able to specify a type other not this callable is written as callable integer. Okay. Defining that this callable is of integer type is that clear everyone. Any doubt at the moment how to work around with this how to get different kinds of result that we will see later. But as of not try to understand that this generic is written over here because I want to provide type safety and reusable code like a box. And then callable is the interface which has the call function so that you can use everything properly and return our result. Is it clear everyone. Oh. Sorry. So, these are the differences between callable and runable please go through this and tell me if you have any doubts. Okay. So, now it's totally up to you how you want to create tasks using runable or using callable depending on the questions that I have asked. Like up until now we were only doing printing. Runable was just fine but now once I do the code form was sort in which data will be returned. Runable is not a very good idea. Any problem as of now. Any problem any issue. Okay. Now shall we proceed and write a small code for using callable for creating task also. Let us go ahead and do that. Now for using callable we will have to import callable as well. Import callable then you also have to import future. Future is also something which we will be discussing don't worry about that. Now right now I am going to create a simple task known as some task and this task is going to implement callable. Now when I am doing integer sum I will have to write the generic also as integer itself. So this callable is going to have integer type data. Now I say I take two variables variables are A and B and in this some task I am going to create a constructor also which receives this data and assigns it as well. Okay. This is done. Now after this see I am not going to implement the run function over here. I am going to implement the call function. So I will write public integer. Please remember you can't write in it is integer the box time. Okay. Then write the call method and the call method I can say that. So some calculated by I can get the thread name also was I printing it here? No. Okay. So thread dot current thread dot get name. Okay. This is also a function. Okay. So I am printing the sum is being calculated by which thread I want to know that. Okay. After doing this you will see that you will need to return the result also. Okay. So return sum. So as of now have I calculated some know I have not so I will take in some and in some will be equal to A plus B. That is all that you have to do. Any doubt in the sum task class going over to us again sum task is the class which is going to implement the callable function. It is of integer type. Okay. Let me just start the bookmark also. Now here I am simply getting two variables a and b aside with the help of constructor call function. I am giving implementation of how to sum. Third point. Okay. Prince I will come back to it. Third point as an in the difference table. I hope. We'll come to it. Don't worry. So I am implementing the call function by just simply taking the sum and I am printing which thread has calculated the sum. And I am returning the sum value in the call function. Okay. This is done. Now I will go back to main and in main I will do something. Okay. First of all I am going to write the executor service. Executor service I am creating only two threads. Okay. And I don't have to create so many things. I'll just remove it. Okay. Now here I am going to use future again. I will be discussing future in more detail. Future is also going to be of integer type. And future simply holds the result which will be available in the future. Integer I am naming the object as future as well. And here I will use executor to submit my request. Okay. So executor dot submit and here I am going to create a new object of the sum task. Okay. So new sum task and I am going to pass 10 comma 20. So I am simply saying that my thread should be some or my task should be submitted to the thread pool. So whatever answer is should be available in this future thing. Okay. Now future cannot directly get the value. So I will write integer result and in this result I will do future dot get. So whatever value is available will be put in the result as you see. Okay. And after that you can print the result. Let us say that the result is going to be available in some. So result is available in result. That's it. And now you can safely terminate or safely shut down your executor. Okay. Let us test for errors once. Okay. Okay. Here we have to throw an exception also. So exception. Okay. So you see over here I did create a pool of two tasks. And the task was being done by the pool one thread one. And result being calculated is 30 and you see how I was able to return the result to the main class. Okay. Other main function. Any doubts in here please check if you have any doubts. Any doubts. What is the use of poly. See a runable does not have a return time. So if you want a result to be returned from your task. Will you be able to return it? No. But the run function just can print it. Nothing else. Like you have seen printing task, monitor task, whatever we have done in the previous classes. But right now you see I am calculating the sum over here. Okay. If I write the run method, will you be able to return the sum to main? You will not be able to. Okay. So what call is doing it is helping you return the sum back to the main function. That's it. Okay. Whenever you want to return something back, then you will use callable. If you simply want to print something there is no need to return the result and use fuck you. This is a runable. Everything else is saved. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Obviously think about it. You will do dynamic programming right in the future. Or basic example, Merstort. We will do Merstort using multiple threads. So in Merstort, you will need to return the result. If you don't need the result, how will you actually sort the data? That is the use. Okay. Any other doubts from here? We will discuss about future also. But as of now, is there any doubt? Okay. Okay. Next. Can throw exception is what you were asking, Prince. If that is the case, don't worry. As you have not discussed the Tri-Cache block and exception handling in Java. In the next class, you will discuss exception handling in BT. As of now, we are not handling anything. Okay. This simply means that if something happens, what will the program do? Okay. We will discuss this in much more detail. Okay. Okay. So coming back to generally is nothing but the kind of data you want your function or you want your interface to have. Like if you saw a runable, was not of any type because there was no data being returned. But you want to have integer type result. So you are writing callable integer. That is all. Integer is like the generic. Okay. Telling you what kind of data can I expect? That is all. Okay. Okay. So now think about it. When we are using multiple threads. Okay. When we are using multiple threads. Is everything happening in perfect sync? No. We have seen how this will happen that multiple threads can be active at multiple times. Okay. Or different times. Yes or no? Okay. So think about it. If I have a normal array. If I have a normal array. Okay. And your threads are working on this array. Now don't you feel I will not be able to put the data simultaneously. Rather, everything is working in the async. Yes or no? Right. So. Future is same. Future is actually an interface and allows you to store the data whenever you want to. Even if everything works in async. See. T1 data will come over. Okay. Suppose T1 and T1 basically the same thread is working on the same task. The answer is not available at the moment. But in the future, it might be available. So the future interface will help you collect all the async data and store it somewhere. Is that clear? Okay. So future basically from the future interface, we are going to create objects, okay. Future objects which are going to help you in controlling data whenever you receive it from an asynchronous task. You all know what synchronous task and async tasks are. The same thing is going to happen. Is that clear? Okay. So you see future always says that right now the result is not available. It will be available in the future and I am going to store it. Polyval runs multiple threads. And the main thread may not get the answer immediately. Okay. So future is like a token that you receive that as of now have a promise that. Okay. I am going to provide the results in the future. I don't have it as of now, but I will provide it. Okay. Again, take the restaurant idea. If I order, do I immediately get the food? No. I will get some kind of receipts, some kind of token. And once the food is available, you can show the token and get the food. Okay. That is what future is doing for you. Now, you were able to see a method which was known as future dot get. So what if the task is not finished? Future dot get is going to help you wait for the task completion. And only when the task is finished, your result is going to be ready. Is that clear everyone? Okay. And once it is ready, it will store it in the result. It is of integer time. Is this clear everyone? Any doubt? Okay. Now think about it. We have done CPU scheduling. Now tell me if P1, P2, P3 and P1 are running. Okay. Now, at the moment when I am running, you see P1 is being run here also and here also. If P1 is a single task, when will the result be available to us? Will the result be available at the first instance when process is run? No, it will be available over here. And what is main doing? Main is waiting. Now according to main, P1 started. Right? According to main, P1 started. But it is not giving me back any result. Now don't you feel like if I am not giving you back any result, the main thread will feel like this P1 is under some problem. Okay. It is not executing. It is not giving me back the result. Okay. And that is why we use future and we say that P1 is executing. The result is not available now. Please wait for me. As soon as the process is complete, the result is available. Future.get function will go and get the answer to the main. Is it clear everyone? What is basically waiting for this P1 to finish nothing else? Any doubts at the moment? I understand understanding future and all can be a little difficult when you have not worked with ASIN for data. Please try to go through this and tell me if you have any doubts. If not, press thumbs up and we will have a bunch of persistence. You all know now that from the front seat I am here you very clearly. Hello. Shall we start? Okay. Answer this. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Great. So whenever I want to print something, I am going to use Renable. Okay. Whenever I want to return something, then I am going to use Collable. Please remember this. It is very important. Renable. Collable. Both are interfaces only. Okay. Answer the next one. Okay. Answer the next one. Okay. Great. So Collable is going to have one method which is the call method. Also, I hope you all were able to understand that because I made the generic of this Collable integer. I am able to return integer type data. If you want, you can make Collable float also. If you want, it will make it string also. Basically any other data type that you want. You can simply write Collable, Data type and your implementation will work accordingly. Is that clear? Pardon? It will give you error. You have to give it a box. Okay. Please answer the next one. As of now, we are talking about Collable integer only. So answer accordingly. Okay. As a by the way, actually it will not give you error. Okay. If you think about it because Arilis was also not giving you error. This will also not give error but it will then accept an object in return. Okay. That was the only thing. So it is not recommended to use in Java and some Java versions don't allow it. Okay. As of now, we are working with integers. So future integer is going to give me an integer only. Okay. This type also can change as per whatever your needs are. I guess it was not displayed in the quiz. One last quiz and then I will give you a small question to solve. Okay. Okay. Great. Future dot get does two things. First of all, it waits for the result. Okay. It waits for the result and then it returns the result as well. Okay. This was all about it. Now I will give you a small question to solve. The question doc has been shared in the notice port. Check it out. You will see question number one. Question number one is creating multiple callable tasks. As of now in this port that you see over here, I have created one single callable task. This is a single callable task. Now what you have to do create multiple such callable tasks. Okay. The document clearly describes what all you have to do, how to properly create it. Okay. Take five minutes completed. I'll be back in. Please check out the question doc and try to complete this. This is one single callable task. Create multiple words now. I'll be back in a few minutes. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. You just had two past different values in order to create new object. Okay. So as of now what I'll do in the main function, we had two threads. I'm going to create three threads as asked in the question. Okay. Then I'll write future integer future. Let us name it one equal to a shooter dot submit. And here I submit a new task. Then similarly I can pass any number of tasks if I create different different future objects. Let us name it future to future three future four. And I can just change the values over here. Okay. This is what we do at the moment creating multiple futures. Okay. And here what I can write, I will not do this. So system dot out dot print. Result. I'm going to print. Result is future dot future one dot get. And then again repeat it for all the futures that you have created. Okay. So result is going to be different every time depending on the different different tasks that I have. So future one dot get future two dot get future three dot get and future four dot get. Let us all that you have to do. Okay. So like this you have created multiple different objects using callable or multiple different tasks using callable. And you have stored their design. Again you can see how threads are being reused and how everything is not in sync. But still you are getting the result. Any doubt in this. Please check out the code and tell me is there any doubt. Remember to do a tutor shut down because we don't do it. Your said pool remains active and your program might still keep on running in the background. Any doubt over here. Any doubt. Okay. Great. Please answer the next two quizzes and then we will see multi-fredit Merced sort. Please answer. The internal interface. Yeah. Wait a minute. Okay. Okay. So again you saw over here that we need to call executor shut down to stop taking the task and properly shut down the thread. Okay. That is what we need it for. Last question. Okay. Remember that the executor will not shut down completely. The third pool will not shut down completely. It will just stop taking a request. Okay. It will simply stop taking a request and that is all. So before we see the multi-threaded. Small sort. This is the internal implementation of future. It does have a lot of terms that you might not have seen in the basic Java classes. That's I did not show it earlier. But this is what basically the future interface looks like. Okay. Any doubt. Yes. Correct. So again if you can remember the thread class, thread class are also calling the run method inside start. That is what happens over here. It calls call inside that. That it is like trigger to execution. We will get to it. But as of now we have not discussed a lot of terms, like synchronized, like waiting. Let's sleep. We will discuss it in all good. Any other doubt? If not we will now see the multi-threaded merge sort. Guys please stop. Okay. Now in more sort what happens. You take an array. You divide it and have left and right half. And you keep dividing it. Until all the data is sorted. This is what you do. Right. But as of now we have never written a thread to use merge sort. Simply in the main function itself we have done merge sort. Yes or no. Yes. In the main function itself we simply used to write the logic of merge sort. Call the recursive functions and that is all that is what we have done. But now don't you feel like when I am running recursion. The left half and the right half are running independently. Yes or no. Left half and right half run independently. So is there any need to wait for each of the halves before we move to the next level of sorting? No. Okay. So in merge sort we keep on sorting till we get individual elements and then we start merging it. Okay. And that is how we move backwards. Similarly these are two independent tasks. So if they are two independent tasks why don't we run it on different threads? Yes or no. It can be done. Okay. And this will be a more meaningful implementation as well. Left half I can give to thread one ask it to sort. Right half I can give to thread two and ask it to sort. Now whenever threads are done sorting they can come back and merge in the main thread itself. This is possible or not. Yeah. And this shows how multi threaded programs can give you better results rather quicker results. It is not going to decrease the time complexity but definitely the execution time is going to be reduced. Is that clear everyone? Now you see that here merge sort will be the task which you will create. Okay. And from this you will return the sorted array. Okay. Now since the task is returning a result we will use runnable or callable. We use callable. Accuracy right. The generic of callable is going to be integer type because we will be merging the integer type data. Similarly as left half and right half are now running independently and they can complete it at any point of time. So we will be using result as future. So that the data might not be ready as of now but it might be ready in the future. Is that clear everyone? Okay. Why merge sort is a very good way to understand multi thread. Also I have a question for you. Suppose you have an array and this array has 10 elements. Okay. This array has 10 elements. Now tell me eventually when you are sorting what do you see? That there are single single elements remaining. So what is the base case of merge sort? Will you proceed breaking down if you have single elements? No you will not. Okay. So if there are single element already sorted you are not sorting. So will there be any need to create a thread at this moment? No. Similarly when you will have two elements. Suppose eventually after breaking the array you have landed upon a request where you have two elements in the left and right half. At this moment also tell me is there a need to create multiple threads? No. Here also there is no need to create multiple threads. Why? Because if you use it and separate into left and right half what will happen? Only individual threads will be or individual tasks will be remaining. And hence it is not as useful to assign a separate thread when only two elements are remaining in the array. Otherwise it is pretty much like having 100 tasks and creating 100 threads. Does this idea make sense everyone? Yes or no? Idea makes sense? Okay. So again the same thing. You can go to the question dog and check out question dog 2 or the question number 2 tab. And that I have provided you the template also. So you can just draw out and write a multi threaded program. As the this is very less time is remaining I will not be able to write the code as of now. But in the next class you will write the code in detail. See how data or how the task is submitted to one thread from the executor. How we can return not just an integer rather an entire array. Okay. You will be discussing all of that. Okay. The template is being as already been given to you all. If you want you can write out on your own also. But in the next class we will move on to the complete implementation of this more sort. There is one thing I will quickly take the attendance by the time you guys try to complete the most or less time. I will read the most or thing and we will have a couple of quizzes at the end as a summary of the class. You You You You You You Okay. As I said I will be discussing the program in detail in the next class. Till then we will have a quick recap with the quizzes. I have submitted the attendance as well. Now host or ever is on top after the quizzes. We will get this extra coupon that I have. Okay. All the best please answer. Okay. Great. So extra memory, extra context switching, excess of everything, the LB system overload also. And that is the problem with manual thread creation. Next one please answer. Great. Again. So the opposite of this happens in thread pool. You are able to reuse all the threads. You are able to have better control as well and lesser overhead as well. Next one. Executors is a class. Everything else is an interface. Collebel is an interface. Future is going to be kind of like an interface. And if you do service is also a framework slash interface. Next one. Great. So remember that executor only creates a thread. Okay. Only creates the thread pool whereas executor service is going to manage everything around it. Next one. Great. Remember that runable does not have any return type. It is wide. So whenever you want a result, you are going to use collable. Next one. The hint has already been given. Great. So again collable will return a result. The last couple of quizzes, last four quizzes please answer. Future tells you that the result is available later. Next one. The dot get will wait for a result and return the result as well. Next one. The shutdown will simply say stop accepting any new request that you have. The last quiz. And this will decide the winner. Great. Great everyone. So more sort. Malry Fedred will be used when I want to solve the left half and right half independently. Okay. So Trishan is at the top. Trishan are you here? Yes come. There you go. Okay. So this was all about concurrency too. Guys, I am still here. Okay. This was all about concurrency too. The next class that we have next week will be on concurrency tree where we will see this particular program and discuss about threads in much more detail. Guys, one small announcement. So you also that the mid semester consisted of more MCQs. It was simple. Okay. So we will have more coding questions. Okay. Because we are discussing about concurrency. It will have more coding questions. Questions will be easy only. But you should know how to write the program very well. Also. And on 12th of June, I will give you a project that you guys have to submit on your own. The deadline will be 21st of June. Okay. So one small thing, this project is building your own shelf. It is a comparatively challenging project. Okay. But do not use chat, repeat or anything else because we will have an exam based on this project as well. Okay. This exam will happen on the same day as your regular exam. But it will have questions from the project itself. Okay. This will be the pattern of your end term.