you you you it work in this table, why not some other attributes exist in any particular table in real world system? Okay? So, example, let's say what I have is I have a food delivery platform, a food delivery platform like Swiggy, like Zomato, like Uber Eats, any of the food delivery platform, right? And I say that each of these delivery platforms receives millions of orders per day. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? So every second on the platform, there are customers placing the orders, there are restaurants that are updating the menus, there are delivery agents that accept the deliveries, there are payments that are happening, there are ratings that are being submitted, right? Where is all this data being stored? Where is all this data being stored? Can I say all of this data will be stored in a database, right? Can everybody give me a yes if you agree with me on that? Great. But database are not magical containers, right? You can't just create any application and just start dumping into data into that database, right? You first have to solve a business case problem to understand what tables should be present in that database, what columns should exist in each tables, how the tables will be connected, and what are the constraints of the system that we should be imposing on to the attributes of any particular table? Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. And this process is what is called as schema design, okay? So the next part of the course that we are moving on to is schema design. Where what I have is we're going to have four lectures in this series on schema design. In today's lecture, we're going to be talking about majorly introduction. So again, we will take a business case problem. For the business case problem, we will introduce all of the features of a schema design. What are the different questions that you need to answer while creating a database schema? Okay? Then we're going to have two sessions. What are the two? Where we will do is we will try to understand a correct schema designed for two business cases. So we're going to start with a business case. We're going to debate on multiple questions. We're going to come up with a final list of tables. We're going to come up with the final list of attributes. And then at the end, we're going to create an ER diagram, which is basically called as your entity relationship diagram. And then we're going to have a lab where I will give you a business case problem statement. I'll divide you into the actual groups. Your goal will be to sit with the people in your group and work on designing that database. It will be a continuous discussion session. There will be nothing that I'll be teaching in this lab. You will be spending time discussing amongst yourselves designing a database coming up with a final schema. We will discuss that final schema at the end of the lecture. Everybody thumbs up if the structure of this schema design module makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Now what is the business case for today's lecture? So the business case for today's lecture is a food delivery. So we could have taken something like a college student database, a library database or an employee salary database, but those are boring. Those don't mimic a real world situation. This is what a real world situation is. This is one of the most interesting case studies on schema design. So we're going to be talking about this. Now why is a food delivery platform a good example for a discussion on schema design? So there are too many attributes parameters that continuously changes in this database. For example, customers have multiple addresses, customers can change their addresses, restaurants change their menus, continuously, restaurant changes their prices and the items. One order can contain multiple items from the menu, right? You have to understand the entire payment structure. You have to handle the case of delivery agents as well. So there are a lot of parameters for us to have a healthy discussion on the schema for a food delivery system. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Now, let's say in this schema that I'm talking about, I have this table which is orders table and this is the data that is present in the orders table. The order ID, the customer name, the restaurant name and the restaurant phone number. What problem do you notice in this table? Can everybody answer in the chat what problem do you notice in this particular table? Or if anybody would like to answer here as well? There is no need for restaurant name. What problem will restaurant name be adding here? It could be same for two restaurant can have the same name. Data duplicacy can be a very big problem. Any other issue you are able to see in this? Sorry. What do you see? The numbers are same. Meaning data redundancy problem is also there. Meaning the restaurant phone number is not an attribute of the order. The restaurant is not an attribute of the restaurant. If tomorrow a restaurant wants to change its contact number which is a very likely possibility. In that case what is going to happen is you have to go to orders table and update the restaurant number in each and every row. Can everybody give me a yes? Is there any sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Even if one of the entries gets missed what will be the issue? The issue will be the data will become inconsistent. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? And if even this is one of the biggest reason the real world systems break. The real world systems do not break because the sequel queries that you have written are wrong. No. The real world systems generally break because the schema that they have designed is not up to the mark. The schema that they have designed is very poor. The choice of division of the attributes, the choice of the tables is very poor. And that is where we have to understand what are the problems statements that we have to cater to while designing any schema. So what are the core problems of a bad schema? So the first biggest problem for bad schema is a data redundancy. Same information present across multiple rows of a table should not be there. We should avoid data redundancy as much as possible. For example, the restaurant phone number was present in each and every attribute of the orders table. Now the second issue that can happen because of the data redundancy is update in consistency. Meaning different rows stores different conflicting versions of the same data. For example, when updating the orders table, if you forget one update or if you forget to update one row with the new restaurant phone number, there will be data inconsistency present in the table. A couple of entries will have the new restaurant, new phone number, major other entries will have the old phone number. But because of all of these issues, right, scalability becomes a very big issue. So poor databases that we design becomes difficult to manage as the data grows. Can everybody give me a yes, first of all of this makes sense to all of you present in the session. For a smaller data of 100 to 100 users, any design would work. So, the query that you write will be fast enough. But for data or for systems where we are dealing across entries in billions or trillions or millions as well, the query performance becomes very, very optimum and a poor database design is going to be the bottleneck of the performance or the latency. And maintenance becomes a huge problem. Meaning, if there is even a single or very small change that you want to introduce to the system, because of a poor schema designed that small change requires huge changes to be made in the schema, which should not be the case. You should be designing database in a way or you should be designing your schema in a way that should be adaptable to changes. Any new features can be added with minimal changes to your existing schema. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, or no, what are the main problems with the bad schema design? Now, why a discussion on schema design is very, very important is because schema is not something that you can change once your company grows. Redesigning the database is a very expensive operation. The migration of data from your old tables to your new tables is very risky. If there's any loss in data, your entire system might become buggy or inconsistent. But which is why before designing any application, carefully thinking about the correct schema for that application is very, very important. And that is what we will discuss in this session. What is schema design? Schema design is the process of arranging or organizing data into structured relation models that accurately represent a business system. That is what schema design is. In simple words, schema design means deciding what tables exist, what should be present in those tables, deciding how they connect, deciding what rules the database must impose. Now, before we start with the actual database design, what we are going to be doing is we are going to be spending a couple of minutes to try to understand the business case that we are trying to solve today, which is basically your food delivery business. Okay. So what is the goal of the system? The goal of the system is basically to understand properly what things do we need to store in a food delivery business? What are the different tables? What are the different operations? What are the different attributes for each and every element of the database? Now, what is the value that we have? So, let's imagine we are back in the engineers as a food delivery company similar to Swiggy or Zimata or Uber Eats. Our job is to design the database for this platform. Everybody can all of you take a couple of minutes and try to answer. What are the operations that might happen on an everyday basis in this food delivery platform? So, the question is what are the major activities happening inside the food delivery platform on a daily basis? So, I am going to write it down one by one on to the board. So, the first one is correct. A user places orders. Absolutely correct. What else do you think happens on the platform? Sorry. A restaurant registers. So, new restaurants are being added to my platform. What else everyone? Restaurant updated menu. So, I will write it like this. Restaurant uploads slash updates its menu. So, new restaurants are going to upload the menu and existing restaurants can update their menus as well. What else everyone? Sorry. A delivery partner gets assigned. So, let us say I would say delivery agent delivers the food. Can I write this point like this? Well, just a better way to represent it, but yeah delivery partner gets assigned what to an order. So, delivery partner completes it delivery. What else everyone? Taking user information. So, new users can register. Users, what is the word for that? Signups. User signup on the platform. What else everyone? What else do we do on a food delivery platform on a day-to-day basis or what happens? User's rate. Sorry. Users rate the restaurant. So, ratings are submitted. Can I say users don't just rate the restaurant users, rate the individual items as well on the menu? So, what else everyone? Delivery status. Delivery status updated. Recommendation is a little bit of an advanced concept, meaning it needs us to analyze a lot of data, previous orders, all of that. So, that is something that we are going to skip for this discussion. But yes, that is definitely a part of it. Because recommendation also, these companies again are not favorable to us. If you look at the business model of these major food delivery platforms, they do not recommend orders or restaurants on the basis of what you like. That is a very minimal way to it. They recommend on the basis of what the restaurants are paying them as simple as that. There is an ad marketing fee that they charge from these restaurants, which is a very huge amount. And only those restaurants that pay those fees are listed on top. Otherwise, you can see that a restaurant that you were very frequently seen in the menu is not shadow banned. You are not even able to see that. Even if it has a higher rating, 4.7, 4.8 star rating, you are not able to see that. Because they simply refuse to pay that much money to the company anymore. So, recommendations we are going to skip for this discussion. But yes, definitely recommendations are there as well. What else everyone? Sorry? What to customer? Abigation to the customer. Customer address. That becomes your attribute of the table. So, that becomes a part of your order. What else? Can I write a couple of more for example, when the user places an order at the same time the restaurant receives the order as well? When the restaurant receives the order, the payments happen as well. So, these are a couple of examples of what are the major activities that are happening on the food delivery platform on a daily basis. But one important thing that we should notice here is that can I say each and every activity that we have listed down here is going to generate some information that we need to store. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session a yes or no? Yes. And why do our databases exist? Our databases solely and solely exist to store this information. Okay. Store and organize this information. So, I will just write it down. Each of these activities generate information. At the same time databases exist to store and organize this information. Now, let us talk about one of these applications or one of these activities. So, let us say if I place an order on let us just switch it. Okay. My question is what information must the company store? Everybody, if I am placing an order on swinging, what information for that order should the company store? Now, let us talk about individual pieces of information, not business transactions or activities. For an order, what should we store? For someone that customer something, right? Customer? ID of the unit database is not defined here. Okay. Let us talk about free attributes. Customer name, correct? That would be the first thing. Okay. So, customer name is what we need to store. What else? Use the address. Someone is saying restaurant from here? Restaurant name. Absolutely, correct? 1 by 1. Restaurant name. Then someone was saying order details. So, can I say order items, right? What is present in the order? Present in the order. Okay. Payment status. Payment status. Okay. Before that, can I say I can also talk about the payment amount, right? And then the payment status. Customer phone number, okay? Something we can store. Customer contact. Now, my question to you would be, should customer contact be stored for every order? Basically, what your goal is to represent who ordered this? For that you already have customer name. Should customer contact also be required for ordering or storing in order in any way? No, right? Can I remove this for now? Okay. Again, just because it is becoming redundant, that's why I am avoiding this. Anything else? I can't do it. I can't do it. I can't do it. I can't do it. Do you have a state that is correct? Yes. Data means design, we will come. Whether it is via customer ID or it will be what is the actual attribute that represents this customer will come to that. We are just having a general discussion on how to store or not. I completely agree customer name is not the correct idea. It should be customer ID, but we don't know that a customer ID is existing in that system or not. Delivery person name. Okay. At the same time, one more thing that we can add maybe is the order status. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this much makes sense to all of you present in the session? Again, right now we are just having a rough discussion. We are going to come to the actual schema design part in the next two sessions. This is just me explaining what is the type of discussions that we should be having before designing any particular database. In today's session, we are not designing any particular database completely. We are trying to understand the process of database design and that process will try to understand all of the important keywords or the important prerequisites. Basically your theories, right? Super. This is very good. Very, very good. Okay. Now, let's talk about the next operation that you all mentioned, which is a restaurant joins the platform. Okay. Again, the same question. What information must the company store? Come on, everyone. If a restaurant joins the platform, what information does the company store? You were in the which marketing team? Sir, I think it is a business. Who is a Rupriya? The manager. So, we have permission for that. What did you went there for? Could you have planned this in a way that your class would not have been affected? But still, you can do this in a non-class way. You can plan this activity in a non-class. Who is superior? Who is the name of the person? Sir, Rupriya. No, S A. S W A. R. B Juthi's Varu. R. What's your room number? A name. Okay. Now, back to the question. What information must the company store when the restaurant joins the platform? Restaurant name. Address. What else? Rating. Yes. Restaurant name. Then location or address. Then ratings. What else, everyone? Contact. Contact number. Very good. Phone number. Very good. What? Absolutely correct. Operating details. Meaning? Okay. Open or? So, here there is nothing fixed. Generally, how these platform operates is restaurant. Whenever they are opening, they will go and toggle it on their Swiggy or Zomato. So, can I say that? Operational status. Whether it is active or inactive is what we store. Correct? What else, everyone? Sorry? Very good. Cousine. What else, everyone? Anything else, everyone? Anything else, everyone? To think of that we might register here? Sorry? Discount. Discount is generally on items. It is not stored for the entire restaurant. But that is not an attribute of the restaurant. But that is again dependent on items. On some items, the discount is there, some items, discount is not there. So, that will be an attribute of the individual items present in the menu. That will not be information for the entire restaurant. Generally, what you are talking about is where we are going out to Dine. For example, you are talking about district or Zomato Kavotana, before district, what was there? Sorry? Zomato was in the section where we could see Dine out. There, we can put restaurant there opening any particular orders or any particular discount on the entire menu or not. But that is not what would be a part of your restaurant information. Check it. Which? Which? Or, might be a bit of a problem. No. Yes. That is something that we can store here. Bank. Details or the accounting things. But again, it does not work like that that the customer pays and it directly goes to Swiggy. Payments are made on a weekly or a monthly basis after deducting what you owe Swiggy or Zomato is a platform. Okay. So, restaurants are the last one to get paid. Now, last one. Again, good discussion every last one. Delivery partner joins the platform. What information do we store? Okay. Name and contact number first things very good. Name, weekend store. Phone number, weekend store. What else can we store? Vehicle number, weekend store. Okay. But again, that will be a changing attribute because nobody will be stopping a delivery guy to deliver all the different vehicles as well. What else? Life sense. Life sense. What? Life sense number, weekend. What else? Rating. Rating. What else? Shift meaning. Timing. Timing. Again, that is dynamic. So, how will that be defined? That will be defined on the basis of the availability status. Sorry. Area of delivery again depends. There is no fixed area of delivery. Experience. Or you can say number of orders. But is that something that we should be storing in here? So, basically what you are saying is, joining date. Pardon? Sorry. Arneen. Arneen again. Do you need your total earning present in the delivery part? Is that required? Is that an information of that delivery partner? Will that be something that will be only an attribute of the delivery partner? Yes. It can be there definitely not like it cannot be there. But is that mandatory to be present here? No. Again, it can be. So, for now I will just list it down. Total earnings. Okay. Greater. Now. Sorry. Total earnings. Yes. Total earnings. Total earnings. Total earnings. Total earnings. So, I will just list it down. Now, I will just list it down. Total earnings. So, we will list it down. Now, what is the business operations? We have listed down all of the business operations. The user places the orders, restaurant registers, delivery partner joins the platform. And then what we did was for each and every one of those business operations, what we did is we have converted that into structured information that the company must store. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody present here. This is basically the process of schema design. You first identify all the business operations and for each business operation, you try to organize the structured or organize into a structured information like this. Okay. That's great. Which brings us to the next concept of. Business objects. So, what are business objects everyone? Inside each or every business system, there are important things that the companies care about. Okay. For example, in our case, we have the customers, the restaurants, the orders, the delivery agent, and these becomes the building blocks of our databases. Right. Important business objects. Meaning your databases model the business objects and their interactions with each other. The activities that those business objects are going to perform on to the platform. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? So, a good engineer will not start or a good database engineer will not start by designing the SQL queries first. A good database engineer will first identify what the business does. What information matters in the business? What are the different business objects? And what different parts of the system interact with each other? Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Clear to everyone? That is great. Now, let us try to categorize the different types of information on the basis of the different types of categories. So, the first category that I have is customer information. What are the different attributes that I want to store about the customer? So, the different attributes that I might want to store about the customer is the customer name, the phone number, email, different types of addresses and different payment preferences. Can I say this much is sufficient for me? Can everybody give me a yes or no? Yes? Great. Again, right now this is not a table. I am not creating a table. I am just listing down the information category wise. Then I have the restaurant information. What information do I need for the restaurant? What I will have is the restaurant name, the cuisine type, the operating hours, the location, the ratings and the menu. Then I also have orders in the platform. So, for each order also I will have to store information. What information will I have to store for the orders? I will have to store the order ID, the order amount, items ordered, order time, delivery status, payment status, all of these things. Again, who delivered the order? That also will be for the delivery information, meaning who was the delivery partner? What was the vehicle number? What was the delivery time? What was the current status of this particular delivery? So, here if you see now what we have done is we have basically categorized the information on the basis of whatever information that we stored or we discussed here. We have categorized that on the basis of different categories. Now, different categories of these information belongs to different real world objects, meaning the customer information belong to the customer, the restaurant information belongs to the restaurant, the order information belongs to the order and this separation becomes very important in scheming. For example, restaurant phone number or restaurant name should not be stored in each and every order. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Separation of information becomes very, very important. Instead of storing everything together, we separate information based on ownership and responsibility. Who owns that information? Who is responsible for maintaining and updating that information? That becomes the criteria for separating the information into different categories. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? So, does the order or whether an individual order is responsible for maintaining and updating the restaurant name or the restaurant phone number? Yes or no? Is an order responsible for updating and maintaining the restaurant name and phone number in case of any change in the restaurant name and phone number? No, right? Order does not control owns the restaurant name or is responsible for the restaurant name. So, your restaurant name and restaurant phone number should not be categorized as segregated along with the order that should be stored separately. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Again, re-iterating on one of the most important points, which is whenever we are working with database designs, we always have to think about scalability. All the systems that we are going to be designing, the database is for will be having millions of users, millions of restaurants, millions of orders, right? So, redundancy becomes very expensive, update becomes very dangerous and badly designed schema becomes impossible to maintain. So, that is why schema design should be very, very clear and this data separation should be proper based on ownership and responsibility. Right? Whatever your database design is, there can be small changes to that database design where the code database design should be in a way that you design survives for years. It should not be a database design that you have to update every few months, okay? If you have to do that, then that is not a good database design. Now, everyone, if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, now let's translate all of this into actual schema design keywords. And the first keyword that we will be talking about is entities and entity sets. So, the next topic that we will talk about is how do I identify entities and entity sets? Are you just, let's take a break of two minutes. I will just be back. You also relax and then we are going to get started with the topic of entities and any sets. You You You You You You You You you You You I Yesterday, in a site I was stars Barack Obama should report on the last message that they have together. So, U You You YOU food delivery platform contains massive amount of information, different type of information belongs to different business objects. Right? Now how do we store these business objects into the databases? And the answer starts with one of the most fundamental concepts in databases which is entities. So what is the formal definition of an entity? The formal definition of an entity is an entity is a distinguishable real-world object about which the information is stored in the databases. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. And simple words and entity is a thing that the business cares about as simple as that. For example, if we talk about the food delivery platform. Okay? Everyone can you try to answer? What are the important things of food delivery platform most tracked? Important things. Okay? I am not talking about what information do we need to track in the entire system of a food delivery platform. What important things are there? Can I write down the first one being customers? Can everybody give me a yes if you agree with me? Second? Sorry. Review will be for an order or for an item, many items. That is not an entity. That is not a thing, correct? That will be for a restaurant, right? That will be a review for a restaurant. That will be an attribute of a restaurant. That will not be a thing. That will not be an object, correct? What else restaurant will be an object or restaurant will be the important thing that the food delivery platform cares about? What else everyone orders? Delivery partners. Delivery partners very good. What else? What else everyone? Payments, okay? What else everyone? That is an attribute. That is not your, again, customer acquisition cost is a very, very, very, very, very, very derived attribute that you will compute whenever that is required. That is not something that you will store in your database. Payments will be dependent on the restaurant. No, payments will be dependent on the order. But should you store all the information about a payment into the order, for example, which source was used, which medium was used, what was the source bank account that was used, right? Because to track reference, you have to then send the money back to that account. What was the reference ID? All of those things should that be a part of the order node. So payments towards the information for one successful payment because there are a lot of attributes for a payment as well, correct? Sorry? No, it will not be related to a restaurant, right? It will be related to the customer and the restaurant and an order, multiple things, right? It is not just related to one. It is an independent entity of its own right, payment, one payment, individual payment, right? What else everyone? What else? Okay. So, whatever we are able to think about as fine for now, all of these becomes the examples of entities, okay? Now something that we should understand very, very carefully is entities are generally the nouns in the business. Everybody understand what a noun is in English? Yes, okay. Again, we are using the word usually because exceptions can always be there. So entities are usually nouns in the business, okay? Not actions. Actions are not generally considered to be entities. Actions becomes relationships between those entities. We will talk about that as well as we move forward. Any a thumbs up first of all can all of you give me a thumbs up if this is making sense to all of you present in the session? What an entity is? Yes, that is great. Now let us talk about the next which is entity set. Okay? So entity set is basically nothing but a collection of similar entities, okay? Meaning, when we talk about a restaurant, for example, there is a restaurant called Pizza Hub. Only that individual restaurant will form a single entity but when all of the restaurants will be collectively arranged together, that will be called as an entity set, okay? And there is one customer whose name is Rahul, that will be one single entity but when all of the customers are arranged together, right? That is your entity set. And in relational databases, entity sets usually becomes tables. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? When multiple entities are put together into a set, that is what is called as your tables in your relational databases, right? Super. Meaning, now we understand that each and every table that we have in the database was not created randomly, right? Each table represents one meaningful business entities. Each table represents one meaningful business object that is present in the system. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? That is great. Any table that we have, for example, when we talk about customers, right? When we talk about one individual customer, that is an entity. Then we created table of those customers, we put all the customers together, that is an entity set, right? So entity is one unit. Up until now, when we were talking about SQL queries, we did not discuss the concept of entity set at all. We were referring to a table as an entity. No, that is not the case. Entity is one individual element, one individual person. Entity set is when you put all of them together. Individual stores entity sets or tables are your entity sets, right? Super. Now, there are two types of entities. Generally entities are classified into two categories. First one is your strong entity. What is a strong entity? Let us try to understand this very, very carefully. Okay? A strong entity is an entity that can be identified uniquely on its own. For example, if I talk about a customer, okay, inside the food delivery platform, if I talk about a customer, customer as an entity is not dependent on any other entity of the table, any other relationship of the table. A customer can exist independently. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if there is anything that does not make sense about what a strong entity is. Okay. Second one is a weak entity. Okay? So, to understand weak entity in a better way, let us try to talk about our orders table. Okay? Then our restaurant table. Okay? So my first question to all of you present in the session will be, when I talk about the orders table, can one order have multiple items present in it? Yes or no? One order can have multiple items present in it. So how will you store that in the orders table? What attribute will you store in the orders table to store multiple items that belongs to the same order? Because if you are talking about one order in the orders table, each order should be uniquely identifiable. We will have an order ID. Order ID will be the primary key. It cannot be present multiple times. How do you store the items inside orders table? Sorry? Is make as store. What will be the format of the storing? What will be the data time that you will use here? Where care? So where care how will you store this? Can you give me an example? Let us say what I have is Chapati 5, butter chicken 1, charge 1 and Gulab Jamun 2. How will you store that in the varca? No, but do you know the number of items that will be present as a part of one order? Think about one record in the orders table. For each item there has to be a separate quantity. How will you store that here? It has to be one column or even if it will be multiple columns, we cannot have dynamic columns. That is one person in order ordering 27 items in that order there will be 28 columns. And if one person is ordering 3 items there will only be 4 columns. That is not something that we can do. So items will be one attribute, one column. How do we put all the items in that one attribute? Yes? Jason file. Jason file can be done before a new free table. Jason file can be done. You can do as your idea is correct. That I want a way to store it separately. Can everybody first of all give me a yes? That storing everything here as a wirecare will not make sense. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Even in the form of a list it does not make sense because searching will become very very unoptimal. So one easy approach that I can follow in this particular case is for the items right. What I can do is I can create a separate order items table. In which the attributes that I will store is order ID that defects which order we are talking about. And item, what item you are storing? Where do we have that item? Can I say that item should now be present here. In the restaurant I have the restaurant name. I have the restaurant number. I have the cuisine. I have the menu. Abhattav. One restaurant will have multiple items in their menu. Can everybody give me a yes? That makes sense to all of you present in the session. Can the entire menu be stored in the form of one single attribute? Yes or no everyone? Yes or no? No. It cannot be. Right? So what do we do here? Here also we follow the same strategy for menu what I do is I create another separate table which I name as menu items in which I will have the item ID. The restaurant ID, then the name, if there is an image associated with it the image URL, what else? Price. I will have the item ID and the item ID to represent which item you are ordering. And the combination of order ID and item ID will be considered to be unique. What you can also have is you can also have another attribute which will be quantity. Okay. Multiple columns of? No. So what is the unique entity or what is the primary key for the menu items? The item ID and the restaurant ID is the combination of it is the primary key. Or even if item ID you want to keep it as a primary key, let's just keep item ID as a primary key. For the same restaurant multiple items can be listed here. For the same restaurant restaurant is not the primary key. It's a foreign key from the restaurant table. So multiple items can be listed here from the restaurant table. So one given restaurant can have multiple items listed in their menu. What we're doing is each individual item we are storing in the menu items table. Make sense? Again here also we can build from optimizers to make it more efficient. We'll talk about that maybe later on but this is how this is one simple way to design this system. Make sense? Okay. Now, now here if I talk about the order items entity. Okay. Can the order items entity store or exist independently without other entities? Can the order items entity exist without the orders and the menu items table? Yes or no everyone? No. But again it is an entity and these type of entities are called as weak entities which are dependent on parent entities cannot exist independently and offer appear often appear in these type of junction tables where you are trying to link an order with an item. What are junction tables we're also going to talk about that in a couple of minutes. But can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the difference between a strong entity and a weak entity? Okay. Now there was one point that was raised by what's your name? So one point which was raised by share that review should also be an entity of its own. Okay. Let's consider reviews to be an entity of its own should reviews be considered a strong entity or a weak entity? Everybody present in the session. Let me launch a quiz for this itself. In the order table, where do you appear in the security? That we can fetch from the menu ID or menu items that will be present in the orders table. You cannot have orders from multiple restaurants so again redundant information that is just storing the information about in one order. What are all the items? So restaurant can be present in your orders table. Okay. Everybody present in the session. Can you think about it? An answer should reviews be a strong entity or a weak entity? Is reviews an independent entity or is it dependent on other entities that are present in the table? Super. Sorry. Take it. So what we were discussing was should reviews be a strong or a weak entity? What we concluded is that reviews will be considered a weak entity. Why? Because reviews depend on first of all the customers which customer is going to give the review. It also depends on the restaurant or the order items. Right? So reviews will not be your strong entities. Everybody can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Okay. So whenever we will be talking about the entities. Entities would always be derived from actual business. Objects will help us define the list of the final entities. And again, we would classify those entities into strong or weak entities. So let's say here what I do with these are the final list of entities that we've decided for the food delivery platform. Again. Again, just for this example's sake. Check it. There can be more or less depending on as you keep on pointing out more use cases as you keep on adding more features. This list can change. But the final list that we have prepared for now is the customer, the restaurant, the menu, item, the order, the payment, the delivery partner, coupon, review address and one more which is your order items. Okay. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Okay. Now, are you feeling any odd entity present here like which you feel should not be a part of your entity stable? Any entity that anybody feels should not be considered as an individual entity. Point out everyone freely point out this is a discussion that we're having right. I'm not giving you a schema for see a swiggy. It's not like you're working in swiggy you're coming to me for help addresses. Okay. Addresses what we've done here is we've created a separate table for addresses why? Because a single user can have multiple addresses. So that is why again we can choose to store all of the addresses together in the form of a wire care but that will become a bad design. Every single time you have to fetch all the addresses you will have to fetch the entire string and then you will have to break it down and that will again give me a limitation of the number of addresses that I can store for a user. I don't have that limitation now. So addresses I have kept as a separate table. Okay. Super. Now everyone this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Okay. Let's move on to the next concept next important concept. Which is now we have these individual entities that are present in the system but what information are we going to store about these entities these objects. Okay. And that is what will be defined by the next topic which is your attributes and attributes types. So in this particular section what we're going to be talking about is what attributes are what are the different types of attributes why attributes matter in the schema design and how poor choice of attributes can create future problems. How real business requirements influence the attribute selections. So in the previous section we have identified the major entities for example our customer entity our restaurant entity our order entity our delivery partner entity. The information being stored about these entities is called as the attributes of these entities basically the columns present in your tables. So an attribute is a property or characteristics that describes an entity. Everybody a thumbs up with the meaning of an attribute makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. That's great. So now let's take an example of one of the entities that we have created in the last section and discuss the attributes of that section which is let's say restaurant. What are the attributes that you've discussed that should be present for the restaurant entity name phone number what else address then cuisine then ratings. Then opening time then closing time. So all of these becomes the attributes of this particular restaurant table. We can also have the delivery radius kilometer on how much radius does this restaurant once to cater to but again that depends on how the swiggy system is designed so I'm not including that as of now here. Now for attributes also we have to understand that attributes are also not chosen randomly every attribute in an entity should answer why does the business needs this information for example if let's say if I add another attribute here. Which is delivery radius kilometer right why do we need this attribute present in the restaurant table. If yes, why do we need this attribute present in the restaurant table. Reason again being the delivery or this particular restaurant might deliver in a fixed radius it does not want to deliver outside that radius to keep track of that why opening time should be present because we want to ensure that an order does not gets placed for that particular restaurant or an order does not get sent to the restaurant before it starts operating. Why stores the rating ratings to make sure that the customers can make better informed decisions in the basis of how good quality the restaurant is. So good schema design is not about storing all the possible information dumping each and every information that we need or that should be that is generated good schema design talks about storing meaningful business information in the form of the attributes for a given entity. Now attributes are also of different types. So what are the different types of attributes that we have the first type of attributes your simple attributes which talks about attributes that cannot be divided any further. For example, let's say if I talk about attributes like ratings attributes like email attributes like salary attributes like price these are the attributes that we cannot divide further into smaller attributes of its own these are called as your simple attributes. Meaning these have their own atomic values division further would not make any sense. Second type of attributes are called as your composite attributes. Compose it attributes are attributes that can be broken down into smaller sub parts. Can anybody give me an example of an attribute that can be broken down into smaller sub parts. Name very good. So name is an attribute that can be broken down into first name and last name. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session any other example of an attribute that can be broken down. Any other example of an attribute that can be broken down. Email why would you break it down into smaller sub parts. Sorry date we can break down into smaller sub parts based on year month and day what else in the system that we had in the system that we had. Does it make sense to break down the attribute address into multiple parts every one the yes or no. For example for address you can break it down into the street city state and pink code. And why do we do that. Why again first of all is this an attribute that can be broken down into smaller sub parts yes or no. Yes it can be now what will be the benefits of breaking down the streets or the address into smaller sub parts. Benefits of breaking down the address into smaller sub plots will be first of all filtering will become very easy. So if I want to filter all the restaurants on the basis of one particular city it will become very easy for me any particular pink code it will become very easy for me any particular address it will become very easy for me delivery management will become easy analytics will become easy search optimizations would be present in the system. If you store the entire address together as a wire care then searching will become very very inefficient and everybody give me a thumbs up if the benefits of breaking down the composite attributes into smaller sub parts make sense to all of you present in the session thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present here. Everybody yes or no yes very good then the third type of attributes that we have are all this single valued attributes. Meaning attributes that have only one value per entity for example for one user when I store the user name it will only have one value it can change the value can change but at a time for one entity it will only have one value. For example if I talk about for a restaurant the restaurant license number there will only be one value for a user if I store the date of birth there will only be one single value for entity and everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no what a single valued attribute is. When a user registers in my platform a user on that platform will only have one email address there can be multiple email address for that user but for a platform for one account user can only have one email address right single valued attribute. The next type is multi valued attributes which means attributes that can contain multiple values for a single entity. For example when I talk about my restaurant table or restaurant entity in the food delivery platform right. And I talk about the cuisine for an individual restaurant. Can I say that there is a possibility that one restaurant can serve multiple different types of cuisines everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. So at the same time a cuisine attribute can have multiple values for one single restaurant entity right but now the question is how do I store this in the restaurant table. Should all the cuisines that are restaurants be included in a single column should all the cuisines that are restaurants are being included in a single column everybody yes or no yes or no comma separated cuisines I should be storing. Now think about any food delivery platform a filtering on the basis of the cuisine is that one of the most common ways people would filter the restaurants yes or no is that one of the most frequent operation that the user will filter or one of the most frequent filter operations that the user will use yes. Now think about all the cuisines present in the form of a string inside the restaurant and you want to list all the restaurant that belongs to one particular type of cuisine what will be the way to do that. You will have to scan the entire restaurant table you will have to go to each string each where care for each recipe basically you have to go to the spring for that restaurant the cuisine spring for the restaurant and you will have to search in that string whether Chinese as a keyword is present or not. Searching in a string itself is not an optimal operation imagine doing that for every single entry in the restaurant table that matches the filter criteria which we are going to be using for selecting certain restaurants right so if the cuisine data is present in a single restaurant or single column. Problem again is difficulty in searching difficulty in filtering becomes very poor when scalability comes into the picture and violates relational thinking so what is a better design everyone what is a better design to store the cuisines. What can we do what option do we have create a separate table right. So, if we present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this is crystal clear to all of you what a multi valued attribute is please feel free to give me a thumbs down this is anybody who is not able to understand this. And again everyone last type of attributes are your derived attributes and the best example for a derived attributes is age. So, when we talk about storing the details for a customer what is the bad better attribute to store is date of birth a better attribute to store or age a better attribute to store. Why age. Let's imagine if there are billion users and you are storing the age for each and every user. Can I say every day the age of millions of users in your database is going to change is that what you're going to keep on doing and you're going to keep on updating the age of every individual user that is present in your system and you're going to check age in every individual users date of birth every single day to make sure if they're growing by one year today I will go and increase the age of that individual. So, here what age is what becomes a derived attribute there is no need to store age is an attribute in my system age can be a derived attribute for your date of birth you store the date of birth and from your date of birth you subtract the current date whatever is the difference to convert that into years that is what your age is everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes second example will be average ratings tell me should average ratings be stored inside the restaurant yes or no yes or no no why not. Okay so again this is a debatable discussion right there is no one correct view. So, there are some pros of doing that there are some cons of doing that what are the pros of doing that pros of doing that is whenever you're fetching a list of restaurants it will become very fast for you to fetch the average ratings of that rest can everybody give me a yes or this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes. Analytics will become faster if you will have average ratings of the restaurants present already so filtering sorting the restaurants on the basis of the average ratings will become very very easy at the same time what will be the disadvantage is everyone can I say that every single time an individual I customer goes and rates are restaurant the average rating needs to be recomputed for that restaurant can everybody give me a thumbs up if they are not. So, this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no everyone yes again issues might be synchronization issues as well for example a customer is giving a rating you are recomputing it at the same time another customer gives a rating you are again the computing it another customer gives a rating you are again the computing it so it will keep on changing right so this is again. A very important discussion which will talk about the trade off that we need to look at while building any particular system this type of a question where whether average ratings should be a part of your restaurant table or should it be calculated on the go is what drives the discussion of trade off between database normalization database performance and business requirements so you what you also need to understand is that there is not a fixed answer for all of these questions that we are talking about it might be possible that Zomato looks at things differently Swiggy looks at things differently right so it always will depend on the business case a business requirements first of all secondly it will depend on the performance optimizations which we want which query do you want to optimize and third normalization what is normalization we have not discussed that yet but that is basically talking about where an entity should be or where an attribute should be present in the table we will talk about normalization as we understand database schema in a better way but then everybody give me a thumbs up if the types of attributes here make sense to all of you present in the session yes or no if it is clear to all of you which brings us to the next topic of discussion which is keys so by the end of this section what we will understand is why keys are important what are the different types of keys this is again a topic that we already discussed so we are not going to go or take spend a lot of time on this particular topic so first of all understanding why keys matter so why keys matter is because duplicate records of their present in a database becomes impossible to detect if there are no keys then updates will become dangerous relationships will become unreliable so what are keys everyone keys are the features that allows your database to distinguish one entity from another for example if you have your customer table can you tell me what are the entities that might help me in distinguishing a customer from another customer customer ID name can name help me distinguish two customers customer ID name is not there phone number everyone phone number yes or no yes let's have a restriction that one phone number can only create one account on my platform email yes sitting no so all of these becomes my keys okay now I have a concept of super keys so what are super keys everyone a super key is any set of attribute that uniquely identifies and entity okay for example your customer ID can be a super key okay your email can be a super key your customer ID plus email can be a super key customer ID plus phone number can be a super key customer ID plus email plus phone number can be a super key so any combination of attributes that can be used to uniquely identify entity an entity is what is called as your super key okay now are all the entities that we have or are all the attributes that we have in the super keys necessarily required we can see that in a lot of cases you can see super key might also contain unnecessary attributes for example if you already have the customer ID you don't need the email as well to be able to identify an individual entity right so a super key may contain unnecessary or extra attributes that is why we come up with the concept of candidate keys candidate keys is a minimal super key okay or the minimum set of attributes that are required to identify any entity uniquely for example here are column or customer ID alone is sufficient for me to be able to uniquely identify an entity in the customer's table similarly email itself is sufficient phone number itself is sufficient so each of these individually will be called as your candidate keys not a combination of them anybody give me everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session that's great and then comes the concept of primary key which is primary key is one of the chosen candidate keys that we select for an entity set to be able to identify the records or entities uniquely in that entity set or table can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no sorry yes there can only be one chosen primary key for one table okay so basically there can be multiple candidate keys but out of all the candidate keys we choose one of those candidate keys to be a primary key for a table because you have to tell the databases a unique way of identifying an attribute or an entity in an entity set an entity in a table everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no yes a primary key can be a combination of multiple attributes that's what a candidate keys right super key can be any set of attributes that are required candidates minimal set of attributes minimal super key so still it can be a set of attributes and primary key is basically a chosen candidate that each table will have okay no it's just a theoretical concept you don't define a super key for every table when we talk about a table right we just define the primary key for that table have you ever seen me defining a candidate key for any table right so these are just theoretical concept that have been defined first is super key whatever can be used to identify but all of that information is not necessarily so minimal information that is necessary is the candidate key meaning these are the different ways through which you can uniquely identify an entity in a table okay now decide which one you want to use primarily that becomes your primary key right so primary key is a must attribute for every single table sequel needs to know a way to identify a row uniquely everybody can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the next type of key that we talk about very frequently is a foreign key meaning when the primary key of a table is used to represent that entity in a different table that entity or that key in the other table becomes a foreign key of that table also we have seen very frequently we have used very frequently for the join operations everybody a thumbs up with the concept of key also makes sense to all of you present in the session the yes or no come on everybody appreciating a little bit more responses here of this makes sense to your thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the session yes with that people first of all that is it from my side in today's class thanks a lot everyone for being a part of the session