Cool. I think yesterday we started with linear regression, right? And we are supposed to kind of start from the evaluation method. What did we study yesterday about linear regression? Can anyone kind of summarize? What have we studied till now? What is the goal of regression problem? What are we type? What is the type of the variable that we are trying to predict? What is the data type of the variable? No, they did not. What is the type of the variable basically which we are trying to predict? Continuous. So, in a regression setting we are trying to predict continuous variable. And we saw that we had built a model that could predict the price for the price for the car and we should kind of buy or sell. So, we had kind of predicted the price for the cars. Now, we wanted to see how good a model actually was. So, we are divided and let us head into two parts. Train and test. Here is where I kind of train my model upon. And now this is a future proxy. This is a proxy that the model for the data model is not seen and can plan on this to come in the future. And now you want to test your model model performance on this unseen dataset which is also called a test set. This is unseen dataset. So, one way. So, here you have your ground truth. Why values? Let us say this is the ground truth or the actual prices. And you have your predicted values. Why had this as predicted values? Basically, you gave your input f1, f2, f3 into the linear regression model and it gave out this prediction values. Now you tell me. Let us say this is y1 hat, y2 hat, y3 hat, so on. These are your predicted values and these are your actual values. Y1, y2, y3. Now these are continuous values, right car prices. Now how do you think we should evaluate it? These are your predicted values and these are your actual values. So, how do you think we should kind of compare them? My goal is to kind of build a model that predicts values that are very close to ground truth. The predicted values should be close to the ground truth. So, how do you think we should kind of compare them to know so that I can know is my model is actually good or bad? Any thoughts anyone? How do you think we should compare them? Let us say the actual value is 2.5 lakhs and your model predicted 1.75 lakhs. Here the actual value is 2.35 and let us say your model predicted 2.45. Here your actual values 1.5 lakhs and your model predicted 1.2.5 lakhs. So, what do you think? Is there a model doing a decent job? These are the predictions and these are the actual values. So, one way you can compare is to see how far your predictions are from the actual values. So, I can take a difference of them. If I do 1.75 minus 2.5 I will get what? So, here the difference is of 7.5. Here 0.10. So, here the difference is of 7.5. Here the difference is of 10.000 and here is the difference of minus 0.25. So, this is known as error. So, I am simply subtracting the predicted value minus actual value. So, or you can do other way around also actual minus predicted that is also fine. This will be your error. So, your error is basically given by y minus y hat that means actual minus predicted y is actual and whenever you have this location of a hat or a hat or top of your variable this means its predictions or your hypothesis. So, this is your error. Should the error be high or should the error be low? Should the error be high or error be low? Error should be low right because then that is only when I can say I will have a good model. But these are still kind of individual error points. How can I kind of create converted into a single function or a single metric? That can be repetitive for the goal model. Here I have individual data points, I will have M data points, I will have M data points. How do I get a single metric? What can I do with this error? Anyone any thoughts? What can I do with this error to convert it into a single metric? So, this is for data point 1, data point 2, data point 3, I have to M data points. So, I will have M error points. I can add them. This will give me the total error. If you add it, this will give me the total error. But do you see a problem with this? Like if I simply add them, what picture does it give? If I simply add them, let us take a different case. Let me change this value to 3.35. Your actual value was 2.35 but your model predicted 3.35 lakhs. So, 1 lakh over. So, now your error becomes 1 lakh, not 0.1 lakh. So, 1 lakhs. So, you notice this thing. If I add them, add them. Minus 0.75 plus minus 0.25, what? If I do minus 0.75, if I simply add them, minus 0.75 plus 1.00 minus 0.25. What will be the output of this equation? 0, right? But so, that means this tells me that my total error is 0. But is it actually the case? Is my total error 0? Like this could give a view that hey, that total error looks 0. That means my model is good. But is my model actually good? It is for a different model at over here. 20,000 less here. So, my model is not that good. Actually, in reality, but the error metric, like a total error that we can calculate is coming out to be 0. So, why is this? Because some error points can be negative. Like we are under predicting. This is what is under predicting. Because you are predicting a value less than the actual value. Here you are over predicting. So, positive and negative kind of cancel out each other. That can give you a distorted view of having a good model by, while it actually is not a good model. Any solutions for this? Any possible solutions for this? Right. So, one way could be that I can square them. If I square them, the negative sign will vanish. Right. If I do the same thing here, minus 0.75 squared plus 1.00 squared plus minus 0.25 squared. Right. So, what is the square for 75? 375, 75 into 75, 5625. So, 0.5625, one remains one. This becomes plus 0.625. Right. If you add this, you are error would become 1.625 0. Now, this is much higher. Right. This is much higher than 0. This is much higher than 0. This could give a silver setting picture that, look, my model is not that good. It is kind of predicting 1.625 likes over in a way at a total scale. One more solution could be that I take the mod of it. That I take the mod of it or absolute values. I can take the absolute values and then do this. So, mod of minus 0.75 plus mod of 1.0 plus mod of minus 0.25. So, that becomes 2. So, the error is even higher. Right. Now, the absolute value is the error is even higher than the square error. Now, that is the possible 2 solutions. Either we do a squared error or a squared loss or we do an absolute loss. Right. So, basically we take the sum over all data points in my dataset. Y minus Y hat squared. The I th point or I take the absolute value of this. Now, these are the 2 solutions that we came at, but this is still not complete. Right. This is a total error and total is still a function of the number of data points. If you have less number of data points, your total error might be less. And if you have higher number of data points, your task will turn out any of the data might be higher. So, one way to do it is to kind of convert this into an average that is divide by the total number of data points. This way you ensure that irrespective of the number of data points, which higher is the slope. You get the right picture because you are taking the average of it. So, this first function is known as mean squared error. Why? First, you are taking the square other terms and then you are taking the mean of them. So, mean squared error. And this is known as mean absolute error. Why? Because you are taking the first absolute value of it, but you are taking the mod of it and then you are in the mean of it. So, this is known as mean absolute error. Is that clear? Anybody has any questions in this? These are very important error metrics that are going to be carry forward in whatever machine learning algorithm you use for building regression models. Sorry? So, no that is not true. It depends on case to case. Let me show you. Let us take a look at this case itself. Here. In the first case I calculated the mean squared error, right? And in the second case I calculated mean absolute error. First case the error came out to be low and said it came out to be high. Why is that the case? The problem with mean squared error is if let us say the error is low, right? Not low, it is less than 0. So, when you square it, it is going to further discount it, right? My minus 0.7 became less, right? So, when you have lower values mean squared error and of, you know, discounts for that makes it even less. So, the error problem is the problem. But on the other hand, the advantage of it could be let us say if the error is actually very high. Because see in this case, the error is what actually looked is actually low on the negative side, right? So, it can discount for it. Let us say your error was 2.25 instead of 70,000 the error was of 2.25 lakhs. Now, when you take a square of it or let us say 2.5 for simple calculations, when you take 2.5, square it it becomes 6.25, right? So, in case where when the error is large, it is going to even activated or 10 in the order to learn, it will be much error. So, that is the benefit of it. So, when you are not there, it will even lower. So, then your model will focus on it. So, that is the benefit of it. And downside is that it also kind of discounts lower errors. So, whenever you have some outlier data points, wherever some of the error is too high, means square error can be preferred. But where the kind of this is the case where you are kind of discounting for it, mean absolute error could be preferred. Why did you say because like why people prefer means quite error? The reason is you will study machine learning algorithm when you take the course. So, these error functions are also kind of used to train the models. And a lot of differential calculus like differentiation is involved in that. And if you remember from your 12th standard, 11th to standard, what type of function is this? Y minus Y bar squared. If I have to plot it, how do I plot it? What will it, what type of function will it give me? It will be a parabola. And parabola is a smooth curve. At this point, I can define the gradient or I can define the derivative. But what type of curve is a mod function? It is a V shaped curve. And this point is known as a sharp turn. And at this point, derivative, dy by dx is not defined. You might have studied in your 11th, 12th, when you would have been studying limits and differential calculus. So, at this point, derivative is not defined. And derivative taking a derivative is very important part in machine learning. It is called gradients in ML, which you will see in the next semester. So, that is the reason why people prefer MSC. But that is for model training, not for evaluation. For evaluation, it depends whether what is your actual case. But for model training, yes, means whether it is preferred over being absolutely. Is that clear? Who will, any other questions, anyone? Any other questions? Any other questions, anyone? Cool. If no questions, let me ask you this thing. What is the range of these values that you want? Is the range of both square and other and absolute error? What is the range of the values that you can take? Both of them. What is the minimum values that you can take? And both of them can take? Minimum value will be 0, because there are absolute quantities both of them. And what is the maximum value that they can take? Infinity. So, they can go from 0 to positive infinity. Now, the problem that we can run in is let us say you are building models on two separate datasets, right? Data set 1, data set 2. And let us say you are taking the function as mean square error, like MSC. In the first case, you are getting a mean square error of let us say 21. And here you are getting a mean square error of 31. Both are different datasets, right? Both are different datasets. Which one is higher? Which one is lower? Which error is higher and which error is lower? Even looks lower, but it might actually not be. Why? Because these are not apples to apples. The first one is being trained on a data set D1. And the second one is kind of being trained on a data set D2. So, you have two separate datasets. So, these two errors are not comparable. You cannot kind of compare them. For the same data set as you can, but for across data sets, you cannot. Because the function, like the model is a function of data D1 here and the function is a function of D2 here. So, since the inputs are different, you cannot technically compare the outputs. So, they are kind of in a way not comparable. So, that is a problem with both mean square error as well as mean absolute error. So, to solve that, we come up with a metric which is actually comparable of course. The scenarios, it is called R square score or the coefficient of determination. So, this is a very important metric. This is only related to error terms. Like in a way it is, but it kind of solves a different purpose as well. One solution is one solution for kind of being comparable because it is of a fixed range between 0 to 1. So, the minus 1 to 1. So, it is in a fixed range, we can actually compare like a 0.5 is more than 0.6. But another important function that it serves is called the explainability. Let us see. Let us look at the mathematical formula for this. But before I kind of move on to it, this is the notebook that you already have. Here it contains a theory. You can go through these when you revise it. So, it is the same explanation that I just gave for basically mean square error and mean absolute error. And the problem that we face with both. Let us say we are comparing two different models model 1 and model 2. You can simply say that model 1 is better than model 2 because the error is lesser because it is not kind of comparable. So, if it is a single model, if you were to end up, yeah, okay. How can we use the metric called R square or the coefficient of determination. So, basically what it tells you is that it tells us how well a regression model fits the data. How well are the variables or predictors able to explain the variance in target variable. We will see what does that mean. But before that, I have a few quiz questions for you. So, in linear regression, if the mx is 0, what does it indicate? If the mean square error is actually 0, what code did you get? If the mean square error is 0, sorry. So, the predicted value is actually perfectly matched the actual values, that is the A option. So, this is the formula, right? Y minus Y hat squared. Now, when will this quantity be 0? If you are kind of summing over i point, m points, if you have, let us say, this equation A square plus B square plus C square, this is 0. Then will this ever be 0? When A is 0, B is 0, C is 0 because these are all positive quantities, right? They cannot cancel out each other. They are always going to add up. But if they are 0, that means individually they are 0. So, that means Y minus Y hat square has to be 0 because let us say if this is the whole term is A, then this has to be 0, Y equal to Y hat. That means your predicted value which is Y hat is actually equal to the two values. So, model is perfectly predicting the values, which is never the case in real world. So, the predicted values perfectly match the actual values. Is that clear to everyone? Any questions, any doubts, anyone? Cool. Second question, how does increasing the mean squared error affect the quality of the regression model? If you are a single model and if you are increasing the mean squared error, what can you say about the quality of the model or the model performance? If the error is high, then what is how is the model performance? If the error is high, then the model performance is bad, right? So, B option, higher mean squared error indicates a worse model performance. Cool. You can take a look at the quiz 9 by yourself. Let us move to the R square score. So, let us take a look at the R square or coefficient of determination. Cool. Can you see this plot? So, we have kind of built a plot of your input and output. Let us say we have taken a single variable for now. X and Y is your output. We have kind of plotted two lines. One is the regression model. So, green one is the regression model. And the purple one is actually the mean model. So, what do you mean by the mean model? Mean model is nothing but every time you simply predict the mean. Your predictions is equal to the mean of the target variable. So, if you have low and pre, like this car prices for M data points, your prediction will be really average. It is basically average for all those M data points for all the data points. So, that is what the mean model. Mean model returns mean of Y I as predicted value every time. So, it is a flat line because it is a constant value. Why are we either have SS regression or your regression is basically green line, the earlier regression line? Now, we calculate two things. It is called SS residual. Some of squared errors for the model like your bit. That means, why SS residual? Some of squared errors for the model. So, that means, Y minus Y hat, this is the residual or error. And then, I am going to square it and sum it. So, I am taking the sum of squared errors. That means, for some taking the error, Y minus Y hat, actual ones will be hit. Taking the square of it, that becomes the square error, then I am taking the sum of it. So, this becomes sum of squared errors. So, this is called the SS residual or sum of squared errors residual. The residual actually means error only. Is that clear? Then, I am finding SS total, which is the sum of squared errors. If the model was the mean model, that means, if I just predicted the mean values, then what would have my sum of squared errors be? So, Y hat, that is the actual value, minus Y bar, this is the mean value. This is a constant going to be a mean value. So, I am taking the sum of squared, I was from 1 to M. So, every time I just predict the mean value, that means, if my prices were 1, 2, 3, 4, these were my actual values. Y bar will always be 437, 7, 3, 10, 10 by 4, 2.5. So, my predictions will always be 2.5. You take the difference of it, minus 1.5, 0.5, minus 0.5. And, 1.5. You take the square of it, then you take the square of it, 2.25, 2.25, 2.25, 2.25. And then simply add it, 2.25, 2.25, 4.5, 4.5 plus 0.5. So, this will become 5. So, this whole quantity will turn out to be 5. But that was just an example to show you how it does it work, the calculations. So, this is the sum of squared total errors, that means, the actual value, minus predicted value, minus the mean value, squared and then take the sum. Then I take the ratio of it, then I simply take the ratio of it, then we are going to simply take the ratio for it. Here, see, we are taking the ratio for the ars squared error, right. Simply dividing the term, these two terms, this is still not ars squared, but this is the ratio of it. This will give me a range between 0 to 1, as 0 means really bad. And 1 means actually good. Why could that be the case? Why 0 is bad and why 1 is good? Any thoughts? So, we will see. So, we took the ratio. Next step is, we need to kind of subtract it from 1. Now, we will do a 1 minus this whole ratio. This is your ars squared term. So, this formula is your ars squared score, 1 minus ss residual divided by ss total, which we just created above here. We just divided that these two terms and kind of subtracted it from 1. This is your ars, the mathematical formula for ars squared score. Cool. Now, technically it can go till infinity, because if let's say this term becomes 0, right. But that will be a case where your actual values are just equal to the main value. That will never or never really happen. So, 1 is a good score. 0 is kind of a bad score. So, negative infinity means it's worse than baseline. Sorry, yeah. 0 means equally bad as the baseline and 0 means much better, because we are doing subtracting from 1. So, 0 is actually, you know, better for here this ratio and a higher value will be a good value. Is this clear any confusions in this? See, if this becomes 1, that means 1 minus 1 will be 0, right. So, that means it's a bad model. If this becomes 0, that means 1 minus 0 will be 1. So, a high ars squared value will be a good metric for the model. Now, what does this explain? What does this ratio explain? Can you even think why are we kind of even doing this? Why does this even make sense? 1 minus summation of y minus y hat squared. Why does this even make sense in the first piece? Why does this come? Like, how did they even come up with this? All the scientific researchers kind of come up with this formula. How could they even think about this thing? Any thoughts? So, see, if you can, you might better have a worse one than others. If you want them to have a guess and you're given a continuous values, the best guess you can have is if the average is not any more, right. You can't go worse than the average. Now, on top of the average, how will your model explain? How will your model's different constraints change in the time variable? So, that's what ars squared, score tells me. So, ars squared, score tells me. How well my predictors or my features are able to explain the variance. Variance means the change here in the target variable or in the value time trying to predict. Now, why is it important? Why is it important to have a model, good model? There's a variable that I actually able to explain the change in the target variable. Why is it important? Let's take an example. Again, of the case that we had, where we're trying to predict the car prices. Let's say I have two columns, kilometers or miles driven. And the car price. Right. And the model that I built using it as a high ars squared of 0.85. That means this variable itself, this variable alone. This variable vice even alone is able to explain 85% of the variance in or 85% of the change in car price. That's a very good model. So, why is that important? So, my equation is car price is equal to w that is the weight that we saw multiplied by miles driven plus b. Now, since this model has a high ars squared score. That means this miles driven alone is able to explain 85% of the change in car price. I can simply get to know whatever change will ever happen in miles driven. I will be able to predict the change in car price, which will be kind of 85% of the change in car price. If let's say miles driven is kind of changed by x units. Then my car price will be changed by w times x units. And that will be 85% kind of accurate price prediction for in that scenario. So, that's what kind of ars squared score kind of can be that 85% of the variations or 85% of the changes alone can be explained by miles driven. So, a change in miles driven could be a very good predictor to kind of predict the car price. Is this clear? This can be a bit confusing. So, if there are end house please ask. You might need to watch the lecture again. Need some theory about it to get more intuition about it. Because it's not very intuitive in the first go. Like this. But does this even hold formula comes from? So, there is a lot more statistics behind it related to other concepts which are not. And which are kind of very high automatically which is not part of the statistics. But it comes from those concepts. If there is any question please ask. I know it might not sound very intuitive in the first go. But if you're interested again I think I mentioned to you the playlist the other day. Did I talk about Stanford playlist in this class? Did I talk about the Stanford playlist? Yeah. So, go through it. If you're interested I mean of course not needed for this course. But if you're not interested in machine learning in general or statistical modeling in general. It's a very interesting subject to kind of read about it. So, cool. That's about the metrics. So, one question. You can expect a similar question in the exam. What does this value indicate about the models performance? Can anyone tell? What does this indicate about the models performance? If you have been given five features and R squared score after building the models 0.85. What does this say about the models performance? That means as I just discussed the model explains 85% of the variation in the target variable that it is able to predict that it's able to explain 85% of the variance in the target variable. Or 85% of the change that happens your target variable can be explained using the five features. Let's say the target variable changes by X unit 85% of the change was because of the changes in these high features. That's what it says. Similarly, again I think it's a very simple question. Multiple models ready to predict the trend behind several types on a company. The multiple models have different R squared scores. Starting from 0.1 to 0.9, which would be the best model? The one that is having the highest R squared 0.9. Lastly, if you want to kind of use the R squared function or calculated using a scalar, this score function. That is part of the scalar library itself when you kind of build the model. Here we have built the model. Here we had built the model yesterday. Now I can simply use the score function. Score function. Score function by default gives me a R squared score. So I'm scoring both. Train set and test set. So on the train set, I'm getting a very higher value, 0.94. And on the test set also, I'm getting a higher value, but not that high as I explained. So it's 0.80. So this is no other case of overfitting. The model is kind of actually learning the pattern well on the training dataset, but it is not able to explain the same thing on the test dataset. Because on the train dataset, it's able to explain 95% of the variance. But on the test, it's still 80%. So this is the case of overfitting, which you will see in classical machine learning course. Next term. So there was about the metrics related to regression. Do you have any questions about it? Anyone has any questions? So that's that was about the regression problems that we had studied. Now we will also take a look at a different set of problems called classification. I think we discussed it yesterday. What's the classification problem? What am I trying to, what are the type of variables that I'm trying to predict in classification? Anyone? Sorry? Discrete values basically. Not continuous. Discrete values. It could be yes, no. Classes, ABC, things like that. Good, better, best. So discrete values. So let's say yes or no. We can frame it as probabilistic problems also. What is the probability of getting yes? And then if it's let's say greater than a certain threshold, let's say 0.5. You can say that it's a yes. And this will automatically become zero. So yes or no. We will see. It's 11 a.m. We have one hour into the class. Let's take a five minute break before starting a new topic. So try to digest what we have studied till now. You already have the notebook. Try to go through it. If there are any questions, please ask. Let's take a five or six minute break. And let's start around 11 7 or 8. If anybody wants to go out, you let's go and have water. You can do that now. If anybody has any questions, please feel free to ask. So we'll start around 11 8. So we'll start around 11 8. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. It's about the classification setting or where we're predicting discrete classes. If you make a copy of it, please. Thank you. Cool. So this is the notebook for today's class. So we will be looking into a user case for the German prediction. Does anybody know what German prediction means? What does German mean? German. German. German. German. Sorry. Say that again. So, German means if a customer is going to drop the door, or goes, has gone out. If they're stopped using your service, for example, let's say you use Netflix. You have a Netflix subscription, right? But if you stop renewing the subscription, or you stop looking at the, or you basically, you don't, from the next month or no, you stop purchasing the Netflix subscription. Then for Netflix, you have joined. So basically a customer going out or leaving a stop using the services or the business, like your business or which your business offers. That's a very, very important problem. In my current organization, this is one of the problems that I'm targeting. Challenge prediction, where we basically, we are a fintech, we are a payments app. We have a lot of different other features also, like banking related features. So people can come and save their deposit, their salaries with us. That's called direct deposit. So that's the main levers for us. And if a customer stops doing that, if the customer turns from my direct deposit service, then that's a chance for us and that's a huge business loss for us. The churn is a very, very important problem across industries, across companies. We will take a look at 80 and each end prediction. 80 and is a, I think it's an internet provider in the US. So basically if people are kind of continuing with the service or not, they're subscription plan or not. So that's what we are trying to predict. So what is the benefit? Like what is the benefit of kind of knowing whether the customer is going to churn or not? So if I get to know if the customer is going to drop off or if I'm going to churn, what's the benefit for? That we can. We can fix it. Like if they're facing some issues, they fix facing some problems. And we want them to continue. Maybe we can, you know, add them up. Some could be sending them a discount. So that they continue for taking a services for longer. If they have any particular problem that they're facing with the product, maybe fixing that. So this kind of helps me improve my business, help me retain my customers through the automated communication and improving the product, the building, the service, things like that. And thereby continuing, making them continue with our product. And in the longer and giving us revenue. So that's why churn is important. You need to know before and which customer is going to drop off so that you can figure out why they're dropping off and solve for that. So that's what we're going to try to do it with the help of another classification model called logistic regression. It's also a linear model. We will see how does it look like. So we'll see a lot of things. Cool. Let's look at the use case more clearly first. So this is my data set. These are the features and this is the target. Churn on our chart. Zero mean not churn. This can be. This can be. This is historical data coming from past inputs. This type of classification is one of binary classification. By binary because there are only two classes. If there are more than two, that is one of the multi-class. We will see that in future in the subsequent courses. But for this, you're going to look at a binary class. There are just two classes. Is that clear? Any questions? Anybody? Any doubts? Anyone? Cool. So that's binary classification use case. So we'll start with the basics. We kind of load the data set. I think at this point, we have seen this quite a few times. Then we'll start to do some data. I think we'll see future values. We'll see distributions and things like that. So churn value counts is. This is the distribution. Almost equal. Which is the early in the case, but the as per the data set, these are kind of equal. The number of values for churning and not churning is actually the same. Yeah, so let's look at the introduction to. Linear logistic regression. I think you must remember this part. We studied yesterday only. The data rotation is the number of sample, season number, features, and the number of classes. And the feature is kind of represented in this array format. Yeah. So this is again a quick revision. And basically, logistic regression can be extended using linear regression only. So this is this was the linear regression. The best line of fit passing to the data. We saw that the data that should pass through the data points. That's for the best fit line. This was the kind of equation. We saw why is equal to a x plus b. Why is equal to w. But people use different notations. So x is the same as y. I don't know if the answer is nothing but a matrix notation. So if you have to kind of represent this equation. A x plus b and a is actually matrix and x is a vector. So a is a vector and x is a matrix. Then you can do it using a transpose x plus b. So here a is a vector. And x is a matrix. Or numpy matrix or numpy array. So this is that we saw that we want to kind of figure out best fit line that passes through the motion data points. And we were using a mean squared error. To kind of compute the error. So this you can ignore this. The regression is things like that is not part of a syllabus. So we can ignore this. So this is the separation between logistic and linear regression. So linear regression is basically the line of best fit where you want the line to pass through majority of the data points. Logistic regression is the line of best separation. What do I mean by that? Let's take an example. Let's try to plot the dataset. Let's say this is my feature x. I'm taking a single feature for now. So this is my function. And the target variable is. Why why is actually one or zero that is join or not join. So these are all the data points which represent. And the customer who have joined based on feature x. And let's say this represents customers who are kind of staying. Now if you look at this, you can clearly visualize. I can draw a line in between these. That is one to separate these two classes. This is those kind of churn. And this is not churn. That's right. Those are churns are on the top right. And you'll know more churns. This was feature. These are not a target variable. This is another feature only. So that's why I'm saying this is feature. This is extra. This is not between zero and one. This color actually represents zero and one. So green is represents a blue represents zero. That means customers who have kind of churned out. Green is customers who have churned out. And blue is customers who are still with us. No churned out. Now as you can clearly see, I can draw this line. Let me make it towards more towards the center. So clearly I can separate these two with a line. Right. And I can say confidently. If anything that lies, let's say at test time or at inference time, when we're trying to make the prediction, let's say this data point comes. X. So which class do you think this belongs to one or zero? One. Why? Because this clearly lies ahead of the separation line or basically close to these data points. So I can classify this as class one. So that's the whole goal. I want to build a line of separation that separates. It only gets two classes such that at test time, when I kind of get a test point, I can see if the data point is like above the line, then that's class one. If it's like below the line, then let's class zero. So that's the goal that we want to achieve. So this is also known as line of best separation. If you kind of have to compare this line with let's say this line. Which one will be a better line of separation? The dotted or the solid one? Solid one because the dotted one passes through the blue data point or basically it can make errors. It can make misclassifications, applications, so this is not the line of best separation. At the other one is a line of best separation. In case we have more than two dimensions, then as you might be aware, we'll build a hyperplane. Let's say if it's a three-dimensional dataset. Three features. Now where do you think the line of best separation of the plane of best separation should pass through? How do I set up? Builder of the plane of the plane of the plane is a three-dimensional dataset. It should pass somewhere from here in the center, right? I can build a plane that segregates these two. This will be my plane of best separation. And in more than three dimensions, it will become a hyperplane. So that's the goal. We want to build a separation structure that separates the classes. And that's the goal of logistic regression. Some notes are given here. But as you might notice that it's still a line, right? This is still a line. So the equation for this is going to be, y is equal to ax plus b, or y is equal to a1x1 plus a2x2 plus a3x3, so on, plus b. Generally in industry, we use the notion of w and b instead of a and b. So w1x1 plus w2x2 plus w3x3, so on. Either you call it w0 or you call it b. Both are fine. So this is the equation for the line. It's still a linear equation. So as you can see, it's still a linear model because it builds a linear line. It builds a line. Now, you tell me what is the range or a line like what values can it take? How much? Like what is the range for a line? What is the minimum value? What is the maximum value it can achieve? Minus infinity to 2 plus infinity. But we want to kind of restrict it to zero and one such that it is in a way kind of a probability score. You want to restrict this such that I get a probability score or a threshold score between zero and one. So that I can say if the value after putting into this function into this line comes out to be more than 0.5 or any threshold t between zero and one. It's more than that than this one. And which is less than that is less than this part. So we want to kind of restrict it between zero and one. We'll see how we'll do that. Yep, so that's called thresholding and step function. So as we discussed that the goal is to kind of restrict it into between zero and one. Let's say this is my equation. Right now this is unbounded. This can go from minus infinity to plus infinity. And I want to kind of restrict it. So I can use a make use of a function. There are multiple functions. So I'll use a function called G. Let's say G. And apply it to this equation. So G of why. So I'll pass the output into a function called G. This G can be multiple functions. Let's look at one of the functions called step function. So what does step function do? Let's say this G of Y is Z. Z is equal to G of Y. If this value comes out to be more than zero, then I predict one greater than equal to. And if it's less than zero, then I predict zero. That means after applying G of this function, basically I'm saying if W zero plus W one X one plus W two X two is greater than zero. So I predict one. If it's less than zero, then predict zero. Simple. If the value of this equation turns out to be positive or non-negative, then it's equal to zero. You predict one. And if it's less than zero, you predict zero. So that can be one approach. This is known as step function. Any questions in this? Folks. Any questions? So these notes might have extra theory that might not be part of a syllabus. It's what you're referring to. Mostly application base is part of a syllabus. So that's called the step function. Another function is called sigmoid. So this is important. Another function is called sigmoid. Right? Mathematically, this is given by rotation, the rotation as sigma. One upon one plus E raise to the power minus X. Or Z. So this is the sigmoid function. Now Z is going to be your. Z is going to be your this equation. So one upon one plus E raise to the power minus of W zero plus W one X one plus W two X two. Basically, whatever value this comes out this gives you whatever value does this equation give to you? You have to raise it to the negative of the exponent and do this calculations. We don't need to kind of do know the calculations how to do that. You'll always have a calculator and kind of you will have to write code for it. We will see how we can write code for it. Again fairly straightforward. You have a function for this in the numpy library. So no need to worry about it. But the property now why this function is important. It has a property that it restricts the function between zero and one. So it's going to restrict your. This the values that are coming from this range minus infinity to plus infinity between zero and one. Right? Let's say this is my curve. This is how it looks like. Right? Sure I'll do that one second. So why are we trying to restrict it between zero and one. Because see in regression case we wanted to predict a price. Let's say that we can take a small. That can be between minus infinity to plus infinity. Because of that can be as expensive as one million dollars. And it could be as cheap as I say another issue commenter one line. So it can be of very range. While here we have discrete values either it belongs to class one or it belongs to class zero. Right? Or it belongs to class two class. Whatever number of class you have. It's fixed limited discrete values. Right? And we want to kind of convert it into a probabilistic interpretation also. That I want to say that there are 30% chances that this belong to class one. So that means there are very low science. So I want to kind of convert it into probabilistic interpretation also 30% means 0.3. So I want to kind of bring it between the rate of zero to one. So then I can either first I can convert into a probabilistic interpretation. And you know is 0.3% chances or 0.3 probability or 30% chance that this is low class one. So that's the main goal. And you want to get a predict that discrete classes. So how does this help? Once I have let's say values between 0 to 1 restricted between 0 to 1. I can set up a threshold. Let's say 0.5. Right? If my model predicts there are 50% chances more than 50% chances. If my model says the probability is 0.51. That means there are 51% chances that this can belong to class one. So I can classify the label as one. If it's less than that, that's a 49% or 0.49. Then I can say that the class is the label is actually 0. So this helps me kind of identifying the actual class. Is that clear? So see internally whatever I'm doing. I mean whatever function I'm applying on top of it. Like whether it be the step function or be it the sigmoid function. Internally it's still the same equation. Inside the function. Inside this function. Whatever I'm inputting is still this straight linear line. So if you plot it. If you plot this data. Once you have kind of build the model. The line that you will get. The line that you will get will still be the straight line because the input was still the straight line. No. The input of this function was this a x plus b only. Now how does it help me? Let's say at the test point x is. Let's say my equation that this equation is y is equal to two multiplied by x plus two x plus four. This is the equation. This is the final equation that I got. And at test point let's say x was five. So y is equal to two multiplied by five plus four. 10 plus four 14. Now 14. How do you tell? So the value that comes out to be 14. Now how do you convert this into zero and one? How do you tell whether this point x. This point x. Actually belongs to class one or class zero. Because the input like the output is still a continuous value 14. Now how do I convert 14? How do I tell whether this 14 class one or class one. Now what about this? So that is why we kind of want to restrict it. So one way could be if this comes out to be positive like 14 is greater than zero class by class. One if it comes out to be negative let's say if it was minus five. Two and two minus five. Plus four. I would be minus six. So minus six would have been class classified as zero. So that could be my approach. Also called the step function approach. But still this is a crude rain not very intuitive. And we want to kind of convert into probabilities probabilistic interpretation that. Let's say if x comes out to be five. X was five. This is my test time. I want to make a prediction on this point and my equation was two into five to x plus four. Two into five plus four. That is 14. Right. Now I can plug this 14 into this function sigmoid function. Here. One upon one plus e raise to the power minus 14. Why because this came out to be 14 so I'm putting here 14. So if you calculate it. So this is the power. Eight into 10 this coming eight into 10. Right. So that means this is 0.00000 whatever right. Seven times. So this low chances of being class one. This low chances. This is these are the chances of it. One plus so treated as zero only know. You can treat it as zero very small. So then it comes out to be very high in fact. There are very high chances that this belongs to class one. Because that's probably one. So in a way you want to kind of convert it into probabilistic interpretation. So what do you know what is the probability of this. This class. So for now you for this course to intuition and deciding in important. Very difficult or very in that questions will not come it will be straightforward only but understanding the intuition is very important. Why do we want to convert here to why what functions do we use for that. When you take a classical machine learning or CML course that will have a very mathematical. Of of these explanations. But for now you need to kind of understand like what exactly it means. So when you plot it. This is what the graph looks like. This is my input let's say Z and this is my output by and this is 0.5. As you can see if the value of Z becomes too high this tends to one. That becomes the chances are very very high. And if it's too low it kind of tends to zero. The chances become very very low. So is there any question in this anyone any other questions in this whole structure explanation. This is a bit complex math. It's what you're understanding and simple code implementation. Not very difficult questions will. Kind of come into the exam. So can you implement a function for this like can you implement in code like how to calculate sigmoid. Let's say if I give you input if I give you input. 25 will you be able to calculate the sigmoid of it as a code. E is basically n p dot exp numpy dot exp. If you have to write a function for this how will you write it. So if this is what you want to implement. And the function given to use n p dot exp how will you create a function for it. You have to create a function. So the code inside the function like the whole structure how will it be. You like df sigmoid let's say sigmoid is the name of the function. What is the input that we're feeding into the model what is the input that we're going into the function. What is the input that is going in. Z. Z is the input. Right what is the value that you want to calculate. This value one divided by slash bracket one plus this function is given to you n p dot exp. What should I write here. Minus of Z. It's minus right. And the bracket close return. Value. So see just two lines of code literally to in two lines you can implement this. The function of exp is already given to you in n p. You can expect this kind of question in exam write a code for implementing sigmoid right now. I'm going to showing it for let's say one value. In exam you might get a list or multiple inputs. So you might have to run a for loop inside. Will you be able to do this type of questions in exam. Is there any doubt any confusion in this. Any questions. You can go home and try writing this function and executing it for multiple values but it will be the exact same syntax. Cool. So yeah see code is written here in the notebook. Import number again. Sigma it return one plus as you can use this notation or you can simply do this is also fine. N p dot exp. Of minus x this is also fine both are fine. So you see you put whatever values you'll get the corresponding sigmoid. So you can visualize it also. So the next shape curve as we just discussed. Here as shaped curve. Right. So the explanation again theory the output of sigmoid function can be sort of as a probability belonging to last one. So you can read it as p by equal to one given x i. x is your input data set and why is your output. So how do you read it if we get a sigmoid value 0.1 it means that it is 18% times the point of the last one. This is the probabilistic notation or interpretation of sigmoid. Right geometric interpretation you can skip this is not part of it. You can skip this. No questions will kind of come in the exam. But again it's for the reference if you want to read about it. No it's not. But you can you know if you wish you can skip it. Cool again this maximum like log like you did as I was explaining. This is the statistics of the theory behind it not part of the syllabus for your reference. These are optional. If you want to refer to it you can kind of read about it. But the Stanford lecture that I told you that explains it beautifully. But again you can do it in your application if you want to actually find the internet. Should not be part of your tests. So that these contains majorly about these extra topics. You can kind of choose to skip it. I can give you a more clean notebook where this is not present. But if you want you can read it. So here the main part of the case study kind of we're going to start with. So importing the data set. This is how the data set looks like. Again very similar to what we did in the regression or any other. So you want to predict the chart whether the user will turn or not. So you have account length, we may visit. How many minutes did this spend in the day? How many spend minutes? What did you do in the night? Total international minutes how much? So basically the Indian tea is that geo or or a tail of us. So how many minutes have you been spending on the same card? Customer service calls, international plan. Number of calls during the day. Number of evening calls. What are the evening charges? So this is the data that has been given to you. You can think of it as a tell right? A teller geo account length is how long you have been associated with. AT&T. Finally, churn. Churn tells me whether the user turned a lot. So usually the last one. These are the features and the target variable that are given to you. So for simplicity, we'll start with five features. We'll take only these five columns. The target value is churn. And the input is x of churn of calls. So we are taking we have 5700 rows and just five columns for explanation. Again, as we did in the linear regression, we will split the data set into train test. As well as validation. You can call it validation. We've been calling test. Some splitting it into train test and then train validation. Using a train test split function. Test size 0.2. What does this mean? Test size 0.2. What will this tell me? What will 0.2 tell me? But what does it tell? What does it give me? Then it ends. No, no, no, no. We are not doing that. This is train test split. It's splitting the data into... So it will split the data set. I think we discussed in the yesterday's class. No, that we kind of divided into two or three parts. Like if this is my data set. I can divide it into two parts. Train and test. Test size is the parameter that determines what will be the size of my test data set. If it's 0.2, that means 20% of the data will be in the test. This is 20% and this is 80%. This is where I will train the model and this is where I will test the model. Generally in industry what happens is people actually split into three parts. Not two parts. It's called train validation and test. Train validation and test. Train is like, let's say 70%. This is your 20%. This is 10%. It's 20%. It's 20%. It's 20%. You train your model on this. You see how your model is performing on validation. You train here. You validate here. You see how it's performing. If you think that it's not performing good. You go back. You make something. You try new features. New hyper parameters during. So you play around till the time you're satisfied. Till the time you're satisfied with validation. You go and kind of do experiments. You try to prove the model. Once you have the complete model ready. Once you're satisfied with the performance, then you take a look at the test set. Whatever performance you were seeing on validation set, you should see similar on the test set also. So in industry, people will play. They're going to get to the first train the model here. Validate here. If they are not like this one, they go back. They can just try new model. Try new features. Hyper parameters in the model. They do it. I'd rate it till they are satisfied. Till the time they get the best model that they can get. And once that is done, then they go to the test set, which is completely unseen. And then they see how it's performing. The best model is actually performing on and seeing data. So is that clear any confusion in that in the previous class, which is for simplicity, say, we divided into two parts, but in industry, the best practice is to divide into three parts. Is that clear? Anybody has any questions? Cool. So see, we are kind of first dividing the data set into train and test. Like extreme, excess, biplane, where 80% and 20%. And then the existing train are kind of again divided into 75 and 25, into x and train and validation. X train, x value, validation, biplane, biplane, means validation. So that means now I have three, four, two, zero rows, three, thousand, four, twenty rows in training. The rest are in validation and in testing. So as you might have, might remember that we need to do some pre-processing, like scaling the data. So I'm importing the pre-processing of important standard scalar. Then I'm simply importing the logistic regression model, a scalar and a linear model import logistic regression. This is the model. You kind of fit it. You get the coefficient and then the same parameters as linear regression because the equation is still the same. So model.quf, model.intracep. And predict function is basically predictions. Whether your prediction belongs to class zero, class one. So you can see it's zero, middle class one, and it's one class. Now you tell me, what type of problem we're solving with logistic regression? Classification, right? And what type of problem we were solving with linear regression? Reduction is still here also, but regression problem. Since it's a classification problem, why am I calling it regression logistic regression? Why not logistic classification? Why do you think we're calling it logistic regression and logistic classification? See, what equation I was using to make the prediction in case of linear regression? This equation. Or we were representing as a and b. So b plus a minus x one. And we were representing as notations different. This was the equation regression equation I was using to make the predictions, right? In linear regression. If you look at the logistic regression, this equation still exists. This equation still exists. It's just that it is kind of wrapped inside a function g. Whatever function g could be. So it's inside this function. But the regression equation still exists. Right? The role of the function is we just finally convert its output. Convert the output given by this line between zero and one. That's all. But still the line of separation is still this. This is the right. So that's why this regression line. That's why it's kind of called logistic regression also. We have some time left. So this was around again application of logistic regression. Application is fairly straightforward. If you look at it, the previous part was just theory. So you get the data. It's like the columns. You do the terrain display to scale the data and you just predict to the predictions. That's all. Right? In industry, you might do a lot of different experiments kind of interface world. But the basic architecture of basic skeleton is this one. Any questions anyone tell now? Scaling, I think I explained the other day. Also you can revise that. But let me quickly touch upon that. Explainability is a challenge. So let's say you go. Yes, say so you are a technical person. You are stakeholder business. Equal that might not understand. When you tell them, let's say. The predict if you book it for cash 24 you go to your head of the business and say that. The price of this car is going to be expirzy. The first thing they're going to ask is how do you get that? And you cannot just tell him that. Okay, I just put it into a model and they gave it. He's not bad. This job is dependent on whether you get the actual prices or not. So you want to understand. How how does how do you get that explain to me changing miles increase in miles driven. How did it change the price? So, explainability. It's very important. So if you are building a model like this. A1 multiplied by miles driven. Plus B1 or A2 multiplied by. Age of the car, age of the vehicle. Plus B. So this is going to be in miles right. Hundreds of miles or kilometers, whatever. This is going to be years. So these two are kind of not at the same scale. This can be. Let's say 100 to 1000. Well, at max this will be what? 0 to 15 or 0 to 25. These two are kind of completely different scale. We have heard of the model. Which kind of has to be the same scale so that it's the interpretation of his base A1 and A2 is more. Intuitive. So you kind of bring that into same scale. Is there between 0 to 1 or you can between. Mu 0 and sigma 1. Normalization or scaling. You can try both of them. So there's no hard and fast rule which one should go out with. You can try and see which one performs best. Is that clear? Why scaling is needed? One more reason is there. That's really. You can do the convergence of the algorithm. But not whatever. So when you go into CML, you will understand what. Why scaling is important in. Linear regression or logistic regression. It makes it basically slightly convenient for the model to converge. So that's how you build the model. Who efficient is basically your parameters that you get out of these. Like A1's values of A1's and A2's and B's. So that's what you get from the quf parameter intercept is again the parameter B. Is your intercept and predict is basically given the input. What will be a prediction? Now, we have a prediction of the class. Now coming back to the matrix. Now we have built the model. Now we want to evaluate it. How does it perform? Can I use a matrix that I used for regression here? Can I calculate error? R squared things like that? Can I calculate that? So see, the output structure is different. In regression, you have continuous values. 1.2 lakhs. 1.25. 1.3. 1.15. 10. 2.5. 2.75. Since like that, you have continuous values. But in classification, you have hard classes. Whether they churn or not. Churn, yes, did not churn. Churn, did not churn. And your predictions are also the same. Churn, did not churn. Did not churn. Sorry, let's say churn. So is this a good model? This is your actual values. Churn or not? Churn or not churn? True values. This is predicted values. Churn or not churn, but predictions. Is this a good model or bad model? Why bad? Because it's kind of predicting exactly the opposite. In reality, churn, but the model is the same as the chart chart. In reality, churn, the model is the same as the chart chart. So it's completely predicting the opposite. So one metric could be accuracy. Accuracy is basically wherever your data points match. Here, are they matching? No. Are they matching? No. Are they matching? No. Are they matching? No. So out of the four data points, how many are matching? 0. So accuracy is 0. But let's say if it had this. Now what is the accuracy? Right? 75%. Why? Because it is matching three out of four times. So 75% is your accuracy. So one metric is accuracy. Compare basically one or two variables and compare what your actual value was. A predicted value was and see in how many cases you are matching, divided by the total number of cases. Is that clear? So this is your accuracy. Right? Accuracy is one metric. Let us show here. So you can calculate accuracy using this function. See wherever they are equal, divided by the blue sheet. And they take the sum of it. Either you can implement this way or there's a function in the S-Killer library also called accuracy score. There's a function called accuracy score from S-Killer and not metrics import accuracy score. So this does the same job as this. Whatever this does, this will do the same job. So either you can use this function or you can implement that very straightforward. You check wherever they are equal and divided by the total shape and then take the sum of it. So as you can see that in 70% of the cases, my model is actually accurate. Like this is the actual value and this is the predictions model or predict. So on the training set, 70% of the time is accurate and on the validation also it's actually 70% accurate. So both the sets are seeing similar scores. So it looks like a 70% kind of accurate model. Which is a decent job. Does it decent? So that's about it. There are more metrics related to classification, which are not kind of part of your syllabus. But if you want to, you can kind of read about it like precision. Recall F1 score things like that. So these are some of the other metrics that you can read about in classification. Before closing, we just want to discuss a problem with accuracy. Let's say this is your data distribution. So you have 10 data points. Only 2 or 1 and rest all are 0. This is the actual ground rule. Only 2 or 2 values and the rest are calls in reality. And this is your model predicts. All values are 0. What is the accuracy of the model? Every way it's predicting 0. What is the accuracy of the model? Anyone? There are 10 data points. In the true value, there are 2 actual positives or 2 true values. 80%. Why? Because 8 out of 10 times it's matching now. But is this a good model? It's always predicting 0. But it's still 80% accurate. Let's say a case, real world case. You are trying to predict better somehow the standard rules. In reality, if there are 100 patients, only 20 will have cancer. 80 might not have like human, people get human. So what the doctor is doing is taking a tissue of that and they check whether the human is benign or not. Basically, whether the human is an animal, it's a cancer tumor. So 100 cases, only 20 tumors are allowed to be cancerous. Rest all are benign and simply doctors are moving. So in that case, the nature of the distribution is skewed. Out of the 100 cases, only 20 cases have cancer. That is where your model has to be very accurate. If let's say, let's take this again. Cancer prediction, you have 100 patients. Out of 20 have cancer or the tumor is cancerous. 80 do not have cancer. And let's say you build a model to predict whether someone has cancer or not. And it predicts no one has cancer. And your model predicts all the 100 to have no cancer. It's still 80% of the time because 80 people do not have cancer. It's still 80% correct. But if you go to doctor and tell, you have cancer before you die. So that's what I'm saying, depending on business to business. These are the main patients that you identify. You cannot miss them. So the model has to do a job in 85 piece and not really these. So that's a problem with accuracy metric. Whenever this is for a skewed distribution, where your positive class, let's say you can treat it as positive one. And this is a zero where your positive class has two few data points. Because that's the reality that the down truth, you cannot do anything about it. You cannot, you know, you cannot make the nature let's have, nature of 50 but we have to have the particular cancer. You cannot have even this solution there. Because it is what it is. You have to build a model that kind of does a good job here. And not if it's fine, even if it's kind of predicts 1000 non-lancers, patient to the sensor, eventually test with filter out the actual non-lancers. But we have to work with them. In such scenarios accuracy field. And we have other metrics like precision and recall. Which I discuss here. Yes, yes. So. You can read about it. Not one of the syllabus. You will discuss more in detail in your CML course. But not see because I can go on and be for explaining, but you just have one session for the integration, one session for non-secretation. I cannot cover anything in just one session, right? So in CML, you will have more sessions on that, where you can discuss things in more depth. But that's the problem with accuracy, right? You cannot always have accuracy as a metric. Is that clear? Cool. So that's about it, folks. That's about it from the session. If you have any questions, you can ask me. Today was your 11th or 12th session, right? So next week probably I have a random quiz. Again, Ncqs. I will be left with one more lecture. I will be for related to some more in studies. We'll see that in the next class. I think it's guest image, like more business analyst side of the house that you have. Sorry, you know, you're that bitch thing. So the end of this will cover what we have done after the mid-tem quiz. So basically, whatever did not come in the mid-tem quiz, will come in the end of this. This is the next class content. I will not be covered by this theoretical class. It's a theoretical class. You cannot have a kind of a pen paper thing for that. So that's going to be about the quiz. But since we'll not be very hard. For example, you can expect in the exam also. You can kind of expect a question where you want to kind of implement this accuracy function. Or you have to implement the sigmoid function, which we just saw. And critical questions around it. Then questions related to pandas, jumpi data. Yes, write the code for it. Code and quiz will have only ncqs. But n-tem exam will have coding questions. I'll do that today. I'll do that today positively. So I'll try to close it by today. Any other questions, anyone? Any other questions, anyone? Cool. It's not we can end the session and start with the.