you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you your the numeric and coding part of it. So up until now
what have we talked about? We have seen how powerful the CPU is
how the CPU has multiple cores
and in the multiple cores
we can run instructions also. And it is so smart that although it runs one program at the time
because it is doing it so fast
context switching and everything
that it looks like everything is running parallelly. Then many processes
many apps need CPU time
which means
and as I have told you that in whenever I have a CPU or a core
the program will go one by one. If the program is going one by one
then how are so many programs running all together? Right? And we also know that the CPU time is limited. People at the back
please stop talking. The CPU time is limited
and that is why we must share it. And we need to understand that the OS has a software
which is named as scheduler. And the scheduler will implement some kind of algorithm to decide who runs
which means which process runs
how long the process will run for
and when exactly does it stop? All these things we have seen in the past
are in today's class
we will discuss in much more detail. So we'll be focusing on what are the scheduling goals? What are the scheduling goals? What are we trying to achieve? Why do we even need the scheduling algorithms? Then we'll move on to how do we measure that the scheduling algorithm is good enough? Then we will discuss all the different types of scheduling algorithms. Moving on
we'll see which algorithm works best for what kind of situation
and is there a good for every situation kind of an algorithm? So this is all what we'll be answering in today's class. OK
and again
we have taken the same example over and over again that your CPU currently has multiple things open
Chrome app open
multiple tabs on Chrome open
VS code open
Spotify playing music
and what's up web
maybe a meet call or a Zoom call. So all these apps are using CPU right now
yes or no? Yes
all of them are using CPU. But are they using CPU at the same time? Are they using the CPU at the same time? At the same time
they are not using. They are hitting play and pause every time. A process runs
then it sleeps
then another process runs
then it sleeps. This is what we are doing. Now this play and pause
whatever is happening
it means that from somewhere the data is coming or from somewhere the process is coming. In the previous class
we had together
we discussed about the different states of the process. What is wrong with you all? Why can't you stop talking at the back? We have seen the process state diagram. How
first of all
a process is new
then it becomes ready
then it is running. From running
it can either wait or it can terminate. Right
we have seen this. So who is picking these processes from the ready queue? Are these being picked randomly? First of all
tell me. Are these picked randomly? No
these are not being picked randomly. Rather
the operating system uses proper rules for CPU scheduling. So CPU scheduling decides which process is going to run for how long will it run? When will it stop? Is that clear? So a process is just a set of instructions. Because the program and execution and CPU scheduling is the process of selecting one process from the ready queue to go in the CPU and use the CPU. Okay
we have seen once we write programs
they are in the job queue. From this
once you run the program
it turns into a process and goes to a ready queue waiting for its turn. And the scheduler
that is the software inside OS
which picks this process and goes to the CPU. And again
at one time
there is only one process in the CPU. Once the CPU is done with this job
it can either after execution complete and terminate the task or it can send it back to the ready queue. We have seen this. Yes. So these are the three important terms which you need to know. Okay. That was the goal of CPU scheduling. That it should ensure fair and effective use of CPU. We want to enhance the utilization of CPU. Okay. Is this clear? Is this clear? Any doubt as of now? Okay. So if many processes are waiting
who decides which one gets the CPU? Should you learn or you can simply call it the OS. Okay. And the date. Now
this is like a real world example of the CPU scheduling. The people here are the processes. Now they are all waiting at the billing counter to get their billing done. Okay. Then the counter here
whatever person is sitting is the CPU. And at the counter
you can serve only one person at a time. Now the person over here is going to pick one person at a time. Can they handle all the people at the same time? Absolutely not. They cannot do that. Okay. They will handle only one person. So they will come up with a rule. It can be any kind of rule. In general
real world
we follow the first come first basis. There is a queue
who so ever has come first
that is the first person will be served. Okay. So they serve person one. The person will exit the queue
serve person to exit the queue
serve person three
exit the queue
serve person four and exit the queue. That is what is happening with processes also. Okay. So you see over here
only one of the rules can be picked. They have multiple rules
multiple rules as in multiple algorithms
which we will be seeing shortly. Okay. Now
before we move on to this
I will ask a couple of questions to you all. Please answer the quiz. Okay. So see guys
whenever we are having a RAM or hard disk
these are all resources. These are all resources. Similarly
keyboard or anything else will be like an IO device. Now should these be able to decide which process comes next
obviously not. The OS gets to decide. Inside this OS
there is a very small software
which is known as scheduler. Okay. And they decide which CPU algorithm will run and then which or CPU scheduling algorithm will run and which process is going to run. Okay. Launching another quiz. Okay. Okay. Okay. So now we saw that CPU scheduling is nothing but selecting one process from the ready queue. Now tell me guys
didn't we see that processes are never constant. They are never in the same state. We saw the whole process state diagram. Was the process always staying in the same state? What was happening to all the processes? Tell me. They kept on changing states depending on what is happening in the CPU. They kept on changing states. Okay. If they keep on changing states
how are you going to put them back in the ready queue? How are you going to put them in the waiting queue? Will it be fair to send every single process that we have in back to the ready queue? Will it be fair to keep everything in the waiting queue and then push it at the back? Think about it and then answer the next quiz. Okay. So let us go over this again. First of all
all the programs are new. This is the job queue. From here
once they become a process
they go to the ready queue or the ready state. After this
they are picked by the scheduler and sent into the running state. And from running
they can be either sent into the waiting state. Okay. And from waiting
it can go back to the ready queue. If the program or the process is not waiting
it can finally terminate. This is what exactly can happen. Now
I have told you
suppose this ready queue has p1
p2
p3. All these are available. P3 was running. As p3 was running
it has come to a waiting state because of something which might have happened. Maybe the time quantum was up. Maybe there was an IO interrupt. Something happened and came to waiting. Okay. Now to this waiting
if I send p3 back again to this ready queue and someone from the ready queue then enters running queue. Is it always fair to p3? It might not be. Okay. Like p2 is there and suppose p2 enters the ready queue. Okay. Then p1 goes to running again
come to the ready queue. So like this
you see p3 will always be at the back and it is not fair to p3. Similarly
if I take p3 and keep switching it from running to ready
running to ready
this also is not fair to the other processes. Which clearly means that we can't randomly send a process to either ready or waiting. There has to be a certain scenario when it will be sent where. Also
in case it is sent to any of the states
we should be able to reschedule it to the correct position. So how do we do this? We do this with the help of CPU scheduling. Which basically means once a process is changing its state
once a process is changing its state
we will always use CPU scheduling. Okay. So you will discuss the case 1. Case 1 is that you were running earlier. Okay. You were running and from running
you have been sent to the waiting state. Can this happen or not? Definitely it can happen. Now how will this happen? You all have done coding in Python. Right. You all have done coding in Python. And you know that once you are coding
once you are coding
you may ask for user input also. You may ask for user input. So don't you feel like even when you have written the whole program and you run your program
the moment you encounter user input
the moment you encounter user input
your program stops and waits for the input in call up. Right. It will be running and then it will wait for user input like in a blog. And up until you do not give any input
it will not start running. Isn't this asking for input also an IO interrupt? Okay. So a process was running on the CPU. Suddenly it needs to read input from the user. Okay. Or maybe there is some data stored in a file and it wants to read from that particular file. Now it cannot continue execution until that IO task is done. And that is how IO interrupts occur. Is that clear? Okay. So right now if I was coding and now I have been interrupted by an IO. Okay. So I am changing my state to running to waiting. Okay. Is that clear? See how the process here is not going back to the ready queue. Rather it is in the waiting state. Okay. So some examples when a process can go from running to waiting is going to be. Suppose you ask for some kind of file input. Or you have asked for a keyboard input. Okay. Or you are waiting for a disk operation. Okay. Maybe something is being written in the disk or something is being fetched from it. So in this case you will have to wait. Now while here we are waiting. Okay. This is us waiting. While we are waiting
will the CPU sit idle? While one program is waiting for an IO operation to get completed. Will your CPU be waiting? Yes or no? Never. It will never wait. It will wait for another process to come and execute. Okay. The CPU will not sit idle and the OS is going to pick another process. Okay. OS picks. Another process. From. Ready Q. Now do you see that it is picking up process on the ready Q and not directly from the waiting? Because technically if it is waiting it means that job was not complete. And up until I complete this I cannot be ready. Is that clear everyone? So you have transitioned from running to waiting. This was case one. What else can happen? What else can be the case? What else can be the case? I showed you multiple. I said ready to running is one state. Running to waiting is one state. Waiting to ready is another state. And running to terminate is another state. Or say transition you can call it. We just discuss running to waiting. So what can be the other state? Correct. It can either you can say you are going from running to ready or waiting to ready. So let us discuss case two and in case two we are saying that we were running earlier. And from running we have come to ready. So sometimes processes might be running but the operating system stops it. The operating system has stopped it and will send it back to the ready Q. So suppose you are here. This was the CPU. The process was executing. And at some time the OS decided that no. Right now stop and go to the back of the ready Q and let some other process come in. So you see the OS has not sent the process from the running state to the waiting state. Rather it has sent it to the ready state. Why might this happen? Then we will go to waiting because you are waiting for a disc operation. We have discussed about time
time and time and time and time and time. What was time and time and time and time and time and time and time. In order to ensure that CPU is being utilized well and every process is fairly getting a chance to run in the CPU. No process is waiting for too long. We give it a time slice. Suppose if time slice is two units every process which comes in no matter for how long it was supposed to run. It will only run for two units in the CPU and then move out. Which clearly means that it has not been interrupted by an I.O. rather. It's time is up. If it's time is up
I should send it to the back of the queue and not in the waiting state because waiting means. Waiting for something else to happen. Is it waiting for something else to happen? No. I am just saying that my turn was here. My turn is now complete and I need to go back. This process which we just did. Removing a process from the CPU is known as preemption. It is not termination. It is preemption. And we will discuss preemptive scheduling in the next few seconds. So this thing that we are just seeing this can also be termed as round robin. So round robin is one kind of algorithm in which what happens? One process is selected on the basis of some parameter. It goes to CPU
gets a fixed time and then goes back to the ready queue waiting for it. Is this clear? How can you fix that? Is that one fine? Maybe it has not been aligned properly. Try to move that projector screen and it will align or try to fix it from there. They might have a focusing thing. Should I call someone from the house keeping? Let's take a moment. Let it get fixed. Thank you so much. Moving forward
this is known as round robin. When one process went to the CPU
took some time and time is over. It goes back to the ready queue. In case it had no time left
it will simply go ahead and terminate. But again
when it is going back to the ready queue
what is the position of it? Because we have seen the ready queue is dynamic in nature. Ready queue is always dynamic in nature. And if I always send it to the very end of the queue
the problem might be that the new processes might have joined in. Now is it fair to send the process to the very end of the queue when the new process of entered? It might not be. And that is why we need CPU scheduling when we are moving one process from running back to the ready state. What can be the next case? Next case is
then whenever a process was in the waiting state
whenever a process was in the waiting state
it can go back to the ready queue. When do you think this will happen? Exactly. So we said that earlier
my process was waiting for an IO operation to complete. So process was waiting for an IO interrupt to complete. Once the interrupt completes
I can say the job is done and the process is going to join the ready queue. So this is also scheduling only. I am picking up the process and sending it to the ready queue. Now the OS is getting to decide whether this process which was waiting earlier gets the CPU or not. Now what can be the last case? Tell me what can be the last case? Absolutely right. We can go from running to terminate. When I launch the quiz
I will share the link. It is not loading as of now. So we can go from running to terminate. Running to terminate means that whatever time was required by the process is now complete. And the process is done. Process completes execution. Now as the process completes execution
it is going to terminate. CPU is free. Is the OS going to allow your CPU to be free? No
it is not going to. What will it do? OS selects another process from the ready queue. Is that clear everyone? So these are the four cases when we will be using CPU scheduling. Let me quickly share the notes with you. This is a small diagram denoting all the four conditions which were required when we had to perform CPU scheduling. So you see the first one is running to waiting. Which means that I was running some IO request has come in. Now I am in the waiting state and then I am waiting for my IO interrupt to actually get completed. Next was running to ready. This mostly happens because of a time slice or some any kind of interrupt. Time slice of quantum. Once it is complete
I can send the process back to the ready queue. Next was waiting to ready. The IO request is now complete. I can go back to the ready queue. And then when the process terminates and definitely the process is done
I don't have to do anything with it. I don't have to send it back to any of the states. Now the only job left is to pick a process from the ready queue and send it to the CPU. That is all. Is it clear everyone? So these were the four conditions. And again
this will ensure that your processes are running smoothly and the CPU is never ideal. Is this clear? Any doubts as of now? Then we will have a couple of quizzes. Please answer this. Thank you. I was hoping 100% correct answers over here
but anyways
think about it. If P1 required 10 seconds to complete and 10 seconds are over
P1 has run completely
what is the point of sending it back to the ready queue? P1 entered the CPU. 10 seconds are over. It has run. So P1 is going to go and terminate. Okay. P1 will go and terminate. There is no need for us to send it back to the ready queue. Only in the case when the process is preempted. Preempted means before its completion
we have asked it to come out. Only in this case
it will join the ready queue. Okay. I hope that is clear everyone. Okay. I will launch one more quiz and we will then discuss the different types of scheduling algorithms that we can have. Thank you. Okay. Have I ever mentioned anything like static scheduling? Never. Also
can you manually select a process which one is going to execute? No. At max
what you can do is send an interrupt and hope that the OS listens to you. So there are only two types of scheduling. One is non-preemptive and the other one is preemptive. Okay. There are only two scheduling available. So we will discuss the non-preemptive type of scheduling first. So what if once a process gets the CPU and then no one can stop it until it finishes? Are we able to preempt the process? No. Preemption always mean take it out before the time of completion. So if I am saying the process enters and nobody can stop it from completing its task
then it is called a non-preemptive scheduling algorithm. It is going to complete execution or it might go into the waiting state in case something happens. But in general
the operating system does not forcefully stop the process in between. Okay. This is like
suppose I am checking your projects and you are all signing in a queue. Now up until I check one student's project completely
can I move to another student? No
I cannot. Okay. So this is non-preemption. No matter how long your task is
no matter how CPU-heavy your task is
I am going to complete it. Okay. So all processes are available in the ready queue. It goes one at a time and then CPU is going to let the process run. Once it runs
it will only come out once it is completing. Okay. Up until basically your CPU shuts down. In that case
we can be interrupted. Otherwise
CPU will keep on executing the process and it will be completed. Now tell me. Is this a very good thing? No. But this is very simple to implement. Okay. Suppose you are creating an OS for the first time and you have been asked to write program for a scheduler. It is going to be super easy for you to implement. Yes. Just let any process come in and then let it out. Okay. But definitely it is going to create problems. What can be the problems? What can be the problems? Absolutely right. That one process will take as long as it wants. So all the other processes are always indefinitely waiting. Okay. Now we have preemptive scheduling. What is preemptive scheduling? In this case
the operating system is able to stop a process in between and give the CPU to some other process. Okay. So process is running. Any kind of interrupt occurs. Maybe a high priority task has come in and IO interrupt has occurred or time slices over something or the other happens. And P1 is going to be pause and you know very well the moment P1 is pause and send to the ready queue
which technique will be applied over here to save its data. PCB is used correct. PCB is basically what? Process control block which means here we are context switching. Okay. We are context switching. So in preemptive all of them or preemptive scheduling algorithms
we will see the concept of context switching. A process was here. It was interrupted. It has been paused and sent back to the ready queue. Now another process enters the CPU and that is all. Is that clear? Everyone. Okay. So yes
the operating system can pause any process and give the CPU to another process. Okay. And this is what is preemptive scheduling. Okay. Now if we go back to the same example of me checking projects of students. Now suppose they are 10 students and I have given them the same project. But one of the students who is just standing ahead of me has made a project of 100 pages and the person behind him has made a project of only 2 pages. Now because I want to move the queue faster
shouldn't I check the 2 pages first and then move to the student who has 100 pages. Right. So in this way
maybe I was checking the student with 100 pages. I checked some parts of it and then asked them to wait. Now I have moved to the other student who has only 2 pages. Why will they wait for so long because they have a shorter. I can say a shorter number of lesser number of pages. Okay. Isn't this similar to round robin where we were able to remove a process and send it back to ready? Okay. Is this clear? What preemption is? So now you have to do. Non preemptive and preemptive. Under these 2 also
we will see multiple other kinds of or other sub categories of these algorithms. Okay. These are just like the types of algorithms. Okay. Now again
we will be discussing numericles of all the scheduling algorithms. But before that
we'll understand some basic terms. Okay. So these are some of the very important terms which you will be seeing in the definitions also and in the numerical also. The first very important term is arrival time. So the time when the process is entering the ready queue that time is known as the arrival time and is written as 80. Okay. So why is arrival time important? Think about it. Why is arrival time important? Without arrival time
you will not know when did the process arrive? That's it. Okay. Suppose you have this timeline. Okay. And you are supposed to schedule these 3 processes. Okay. Now as of now
can I say I'm assuming that all the processes are arriving at 0 time. All the processes are arriving at 0 time because no time has been given. But if I say that the arrival time is given
P1 arrives at 2
P2 arrives at 5
P3 arrives at 0. Now tell me when you are at the time instance 0
which of the processes can you run at the moment? Correct. The only process which you can run is P3. Similarly
if we were at the time interval 3
then which processes can you run right now? Which processes can you run right now? Correct. Now you have 2 options. You can either run P3 or you can run P1. Okay. I am saying that I am at 3 and decide which of the algorithm or which of the processes you want. You are capable of running. Okay. So you cannot run any program before its arrival time. Now why is this important? Because in the numericals
we'll be doing you will see a whole table. And the table will contain different different markers of time. Now once you are asked to schedule all this
what sometimes people do that they pick the shortest time and schedule them first. But what if the process didn't even arrive? Okay. This brings us to the next question. After arriving
how much time is actually needed by the CPU to execute or to let the process execute? Or rather we can say how much CPU time is exactly required by the process for its completion. Now this time is not known as execution time. It is not known as running time. It is known as the burst time. Okay. So the actual amount of time required by the process to complete its execution is known as the burst time. Okay. Now these terms are very important because these are the terms which you will be seeing in the numericals also. Okay. So suppose P1 needs 10 units
P2 needs 2 units
P3 needs 5 units. Okay. And again
think about the previous example now. We always
if we are scheduling and you want to implement something
you always feel like whatever is ending the fastest should be the first to be selected. Like here right now
if I don't give you the arrival time
if I don't give you the arrival time
which is the process which you will be selecting. P2
why? Because it has the shortest time. Okay. But I am at zero instance right now. I am at zero time instance. And when I see this has P2 even arrived at the moment. No
it has not arrived. So you cannot pick a process which has not arrived and that is why arrival time was so important. Okay. And burst time is the time needed by the process to complete. Okay. Now after the process has run completely
how do we know when did it finish? We always have the access to the timeline. Okay. So tell me at what time does the process complete? That time is known as the completion time. Okay. So if I am saying that the process completes at eight units. It means that your process took eight units to finally complete its job. Is that clear? At what time exactly has the process finished? That is the completion time. Now the next question might arise that from arrival to completion
from arrival to its completion. How much time did the process spend in the system? Right. If I am saying that I am completing my job at eight units and I arrived at two units. How much time have I spent in the system? Now this time can be me waiting in the ready queue. Me actually running or going back everything is included. This time is known as the turn around time. And it is given by the difference between the completion time and the arrival time. Okay. This is the total time that you have spent inside the system. So suppose I say that CT is given. CT is 12 units. Okay. So I am going to say that I am going to start with the 15 units. This is eight units. Okay. Can you all calculate the turn around time for everyone? So P1 arrives at two and completes at 12. So what was the turn around time? Ten units. It has spent ten units in the system. As of now I do not know how long it was waiting for
how long it was executing. I just know that it needed ten units to be there. What about P2? Again ten. And what about P3? Eight. Okay. And that is how we can see that this is the total time spent inside the system. First time is how much you require. Like if you go to a government bank
you just want to submit a check. It hardly takes two seconds to submit a check. But will you just go immediately submit the check and come back? No. Right. You might have to wait there. You might go to the counter. Then they might tell you that some mistake in the form. You come back and you made the correction and then go back. Okay. But total time that you have spent in the bank is total this turn around time. Total time you needed to complete your task is the burst time. Not the art. You can say that but it is the time I need to complete it. Okay. So you are saying if we do not wait
we have a right-on time
there is no other process than yes
that is the ideal time. Okay. So taking the bank example. Okay. Suppose I arrive at 1 pm
okay. This will be my arrival time. Okay. I need only five minutes. I need only five minutes to complete my task. This is completion time. Okay. Sorry. Burst time. Burst time. Okay. Now I am saying that I was able to leave the bank at 3 pm. Okay. My task got completed at 3 pm. This is the completion time. Okay. And how much time have I spent in the bank? That is going to be the turn around time. So if I am arriving at 1 and leaving at 3
how much time have I spent in the bank? Two hours. I hope this is clear now. Any doubt at the point? Okay. Okay. So we have discussed the turn the round time. Total time I have spent inside the system. Okay. But out of this total time
clearly if you are able to see that I have spent two hours
my work was only a five minutes. What was I doing for the rest of the time? Waiting. Right. So how long does a process wait in the ready queue? That is given by the wait time. And wait time is going to be the difference between the turn around time and the thing. Was time? First time. Absolutely right. Okay. So this is going to be the wait time. How long was I waiting for? It is given by WT. Okay. So if I talk about the very first process
how much time did I wait for? Turn around time was 10. Okay. I am done with my task and I can say there was zero wait time in world. What might have happened? I arrived at two and I had to the CPU was empty. It has taken me up than my task. Okay. Same for P2. Turn around time was 10. Burst time was only 2. How much did I wait for? Eight units. Then turn around time is 8 for P3. Burst time is 5. How much time did I wait for? Three. Okay. So this is generally how the numericals will be solved as well. Is this clear everyone? So going forward in the next class
you will see two things. One is this table in this table. You are mostly given arrival time and burst time. Sometimes you are also given the completion time depending on what will be asked from you. Okay. And then you will have to draw this timeline. This timeline will be known as the Gantt chart. Okay. In Gantt chart
you will show which process enter when does it lead for how long does it run. Okay. All this will be calculated. Okay. Now one more thing which you might not get in the numerical but is important for real life. Now. Suppose if you click on an app
okay. The app might take some time to respond. Right. The first time you open an app
it takes a little longer as compared to if you have run it for the third or fourth time without exiting it. Okay. What do you think that time is called? If I am opening an app
it took some time. Okay. And then open it. What is that time called? Okay. Is it loading the process? Is a much simpler term actually. It is known as the response time. Okay. The time task takes to respond or other. You can say the time CPU is taking to respond to a particular program is known as the response time again. You will not see it in the numericals but it is important for real life. Okay. The interactive system. Okay. Whenever you will have an interactive system that something you open and then it loads completely and it is shown to you. In that case
the response time must be very
very high because the moment you open an app and it does not open for the time. It does not open for the next 20 seconds. You will feel like the process is dead. My laptop is hanging. There is some problem. Is that clear? Everyone? Any doubt at the moment? Great. We will again have some very simple quizzes. Okay. This is about the kind of scheduling algorithm. Please answer. Sometimes I feel like you answered incorrectly just to mess with me. This is a very simple question. Come on guys. Okay. Okay. So definitely what does preemption mean? Preemption means that or the preemptive algorithms mean that I cannot. I will come out of the system depending on what interrupt has occurred. If I am talking about non-preemptive
the process is going to complete its job and then only move out of the CPU. There is nothing else which can make it move out. Okay. Next quiz. Yes. Great. So in preemption what will happen? You will always have a ready running and termination state. Okay. And the OS can always interrupt any process which was running and send it back to the ready state. This is what preemption means. Let us do one more quiz. Okay. Okay. So round robin again what happens over here if you have multiple processes and any process enters the CPU. Okay. So suppose I am saying that P4 enters the CPU. It is based on time quantum. Once the time quantum finishes P4 will go back in the ready. Another process is picked. Does it sign quantum and send back to the ready. This is what round robin is and because you are able to preempt the process from the CPU
it is going to be a preemptive kind of algorithm. Okay. Round robin is always preemptive in nature. Okay. Next quiz. So we just saw the different time. Arrival time is when the process arrives. First time is how long the CPU or the process needs to complete it. Completion time is when exactly it is completing. Turn around time is total time spent in the system. Waiting time is total time spent waiting. And response time is when does the CPU notice the app for the first time. Okay. Keeping these three things in mind
please answer the next quiz. Okay. Here again. Okay. Here again. Okay. This is the timeline. Now if I am saying that the process is arriving at 2 and it is done at 10
you have spent only this amount of time inside the system. This is the turnaround time and it is 80 units. Okay. This is going to be CT minus 80 which is 10 minus 2 equal to total 80 units. And that's it. Okay. Please remember the difference between the different times. Next one is going to be about waiting time. Okay. Okay. Okay. So here we said that the turnaround time was 9 and the burst time is 4. It means that I have completed my execution at 9. But I needed only 4 units which means there was a lot of weight involved. And hence weight time is going to be the turnaround time minus the burst time which is 5 units. Okay. So with this we are done with all the important terms also. Okay. And we will move on to the next topic. Now tell me how do you decide whether a scheduling algorithm is good or bad? Is there was just one single criteria on which you can base it? No. Okay. So whenever your CPU has multiple algorithms to implement
how can I decide which one is the best one? But this we use the CPU scheduling criteria. Okay. So what is the one obvious goal of CPU scheduling that the CPU must be overworked? It should not sit idle. Okay. And the utilization means how much time the CPU is actually doing some useful work. Now this does not include context switching. This includes when actually a process is running. So a good scheduling algorithm is always try to keep the CPU very busy which means the CPU utilization is going to be very
very high. Okay. So first criteria is keep the utilization at max. Okay. Now if the CPU is ideal while the processes are waiting in the ready queue. Is that a very good scheduling algorithm? No. If the CPU is busy
can I say for sure that the CPU is definitely doing my processes and that is why it is busy? Not always. Because it is context switching also it is doing other tasks also. Okay. So how do we measure how much work is being done by the CPU? Okay. Which means that how many processes are being completed in a given time? This can be given by the throughput. Okay. Thruput means the number of processes which you are completing per unit time. If the number of processes which you are completing per unit time is higher
the throughput is also going to be higher. Okay. So I can say
suppose if 10 processes are completing in 5 seconds
how many processes are you completing per second? 10 by 5 which is 2 processes per second. Okay. This is the rate. So a good scheduling algorithm will always try to increase the throughput which means that per second more and more processes should be executing. Is that clear? Per second more and more processes should be executing and that is calculated by the throughput. Higher number of processes
higher throughput as well. But now tell me is just completing processes enough or do we also care about how long did each process take? Definitely we did care about it. Okay. And that's why measuring the turn around time was important and our goal should be that each process should spend less and less time inside the system. It should only come
execute and leave at mass. Okay. So you want to minimize the total turn around time and any good algorithm will try minimizing it. Okay. So if a process enters a system at 0 and completes at time 20
it has spent 20 units of time in the system. So if the process burst time would happen 20
then it's a great algorithm. Okay. But if the burst time was only 2
then it means it is not a very good algorithm because turn around time was more. Is that clear? Okay. Similar to turn around time
the CPU and the OS should also ensure that if a process has come to the ready queue
it should not be waiting for too long. Okay. If you are waiting for too long
definitely something is wrong. The should see the scheduling algorithm is not very good. Okay. So waiting time is also an important criteria. How much time did a process spend on waiting? Please minimize that. Okay. Now the operating system cannot reduce the actual CPU time
which is required by the process. You cannot reduce the burst time. Okay. Like if a process needs 10 units
it needs 10 units. Okay. The requirement is fixed. What you can optimize is the waiting time
which is extra
which the process has required. Okay. Then comes the interactive systems and an interactive system response time matters a lot. The first time you click an app
what do you expect to happen? You want that app to open immediately. If it is not opening
then something is going on wrong. Okay. So all these criteria are very
very important for any kind of CPU scheduling algorithm. Okay. Now we will see all the algorithms one by one. The first algorithm is known as first comes first. So it is the simplest way to possibly schedule something
simplest way. Okay. So the process enters already queue first
whichever enters first gets the CPU first. Now this FCFS is always and always going to be non-preemptive. Okay. It is non-preemptive. Once a process starts
it will keep on executing. It cannot be stopped in between. Okay. Suppose all the processes are here. This entered first
second
third and fourth. So CPU is going to serve P1 first
then P2
then P3 and then P4. Okay. So what is the advantage over here? Definitely very simple to understand if you are creating an algorithm for the very first time you can go ahead with this. Easy to implement. Okay. And because eventually every single process is getting a turn
all the processes will not go under starvation. Starvation is like indefinite waiting. But here I definitely know that I will be waiting because people in my front are moving ahead. Okay. But what do you think can be a problem? What is the disadvantage of this? What is the disadvantage? Sarvation will not happen because eventually your turn will come. It might come late
but it will come. So starvation is like the new processes are coming in front of me and I'm waiting indefinitely. Okay. That's a different thing. It comes in the next algorithm. Right now
if you see this
what did I mention that I have to wait for my turn. It is non preemptive. Okay. So what do you think can happen? Yes. There are a couple of right answers in the chat also. Very first thing that should come into your mind. The same example as the project checking. If one process needs two units
other needs three units. And the first one which is ahead in the queue needs hundred units. Right. We are taking hundred units. So the shorter processes are waiting for long. And because of that
the average weight time of the system becomes high. Do you want the weight time to become high? No. We do not want the weight time to become high. This effect right now is known as the con-y effect. It happens when a long process is delaying the other short processes. Okay. Now short processes can be completed very
very quickly
but because they are stuck behind the large process
we are waiting. This is the con-y effect. Is this clear? Any doubt? Okay. So what do you feel like is the main problem with FCFS? Main problem is con-y effect only. Okay. That the short processes have to wait for too long. Not to avoid short processes
wait for too long. What should we do? I can't hear it please be louder. Now just give the answer for that if I am making you wait for longer. The short process is waiting for long. So what is the quick fix? Okay. Short the data
right? Complete the short process first and this problem is solved. See
what we are doing? We are understanding and we will go at them. Figure out what is the problem and that solve then that problem only. Okay. Right now the problem is con-y effect. Short processes are waiting. So as short processes were waiting
now I say that the short processes don't need to wait. So what we are doing is we are understanding and we will go at them. Figure out what is the problem and that solve then that problem only. See that the short processes don't need to wait. Rather
now I will pick the short jobs first. Okay. Shortness job first has two areas. It is preemptive in nature and non-preemptive in nature both. So depending on your wish
you can implement any of it. Okay. Is that clear? In non-preemptive short processes pick and runs completely in the system and then terminates. In preemptive
the process will execute for a particular time slice and then moved back. Okay. Preemptive short test job first is also known as short test remaining time first. Okay. As we will do the numericals
we will discuss this in much more detail. The preemptive version of short test job first is the shortest remaining time first. Okay. Other is the non-preemptive one. Okay. So shortest job first
what is going to happen here? We are again having multiple processes
but but which ever takes lesser amount of burst time
I am going to execute that here. I have so many processes. P4 takes only one burst time. I am going to execute him first. Then P2 is going to have two burst time executes first. Then P3 and then P1. That is what is going to happen. Okay. Now definitely if I am picking the short jobs first
the minimum average time has been reduced. The minimum average time has been reduced. And the shorter tasks are more common. We have seen this shorter task will definitely be more common as compared to the longer this longer processes. Then definitely if more number of short tasks are there
they will be completed quickly. So overall the efficiency is also increased. Now what do you think? What are the cons for this particular algorithm? Correct. First of all
we should know the burst time of every process in advance. Somebody asked me in the previous class that how does the CPU know the burst time of every process? So what happens is that the CPU is going to estimate the time. Now every process which you are running on the CPU is not a completely new process. Only the first time it runs
it is new. That is the time that estimation is made. And every next time it is run
the CPU understands it is a long process or short process. How much time it takes and that is how it knows the burst time of all the process. Okay. So if you want to implement shortest job first
you should know the burst time in advance. And definitely it is not practical to know the burst time of everything in advance. Okay. And as we have seen that the ready queue is dynamic
ready queue is dynamic. And if you always keep on picking the shortest job first
the long processes
the long processes are always waiting. And it is not really because it is just keeping the time
the this Gantt chart thing that you have. Now the timeline is interactive. That is how you know how long time what time it is taking. Okay. So long processes are waiting. If long process are waiting and now new processes keep on entering the queue. What will you see? This is when you see starvation because earlier I was sure that okay after this number of process my turn will come. But right now are you sure that when will your time come? No. So starvation happens when a process uses or I can say the process waits for a very long time because the other processes keep getting selected. Okay. And the shortest job first will lead to starvation. Okay. And this starvation is generally for the long process. Okay. Now tell me should every process be treated equally? What if some processes are more important than the other? Okay. So in that case what should we do should we always pick up the shortest job? No
I can't. Okay. There are different kinds of processes in the system. Some are system processes. Okay. These are the tasks with the CPU is doing on the backend. Some are user processes. Now as a system processes are very essential for the CPU to run. You know that system processes will be CPU heavy and they will take more time. Whereas user processes are shorter. Don't you feel like right now I'm prioritizing all the user processes because they are shorter. So as system processes are not executing because they have having longer burst time. So we want to make sure that the processes should be given more importance and whichever process has more importance should run first. Okay. This kind of algorithm is known as the priority scheduling. Okay. Each process is given a priority and the process with the highest priority gets the CPU first. This is also both preemptive and non-preemptive both ways can be implemented. So in preemptive scheduling if a higher priority process is arriving then whatever the CPU was running that will be preempted. This will see in the numericers which we do in the next class. I can give a real life example like think of a hospital. Now in hospital they are multiple patients but if some accident happens or an emergency occurs. Everyone will now look for that particular patient instead of looking after a patient who has minor cold and cough. This is basically priority scheduling priority based service you are providing. So P1 P2 P3 P4 is that P3 over here has the highest priority and that is why P3 is chosen. Okay. Then next P1 has the highest priority P1 is chosen then P4 has the highest priority. This is chosen and then P2 has the highest priority. So definitely now whatever is more important is getting completed quickly and it is more useful in the real life system where you have a real real system level task. Now this is flexible because priorities can be assigned on the basis of the needs. Now in this there are a lot of advantages but what do you feel like are going to be the cons of this particular algorithm? Cons of this particular algorithm. Deciding the priority is very difficult because do you get to decide the priority? No. OS is deciding the priority. Now OS is definitely going to give more priority to system task as compared to your task and maybe the task that you want to do is very very urgent. Okay. In that case because your task has lower priority it will not execute immediately. Okay. So I can say sometimes this may not be fair. Okay. First of all priority deciding is very difficult. Okay. Very difficult and definitely it is not fair and the lower priority processes. Again can go into starvation. Yes or no. Whatever is lower priority may starve. But there is a quick fix. There is a quick fix to solve this particular problem. What do you think should be done in order to ensure that no process is starving? Now time quantum is definitely there but it is still going in the back of the queue only. And then waiting for it to turn what if a process with higher priority arrives then again it is waiting. Same thing. This technique which we apply to solve starvation is known as aging. Now in aging the priority of the waiting processes gradually increases over time. So even if you were a low priority process and new processes are coming in with the time you will be aging and your priority will keep on increasing. And definitely as the priority increases I can say that now I will be picked by the CPU. So see earlier when I did not apply aging P1 had priority one and because of which P1 was never getting picked. The processes of higher priority were coming and getting picked every time. Okay. So P1 never got time but when I applied the concept of aging as and when a new process came in P1 was aging aging aging and that is how it became higher priority. Okay. Like I can say P1 had the priority one P2 had priority two P3 had priority three P4 had priority four. Okay. This executes priority will be increasing as a new process enters. So P5 enters with the priority three P2 will age and priority will become two. Okay. Similarly
I say P1 will increase priority two P2 increases priority two three P3 increases priority two four. So now what is it P3 will be picked. Then again a new process enters as similarly everybody is aging so you can understand that eventually all the old processes will have a higher priority and they will be picked. So that is the solution of starvation. Okay. But still we are saying that this algorithm may not be fair. Okay. So what should we do instead now the type they think comes in that we can round robin instead of letting it run for very long we can now apply a certain time quantum. Okay. And if you apply a time quantum of fixed time slice every process comes in executes within the time slice and then exists. If it does not finish it will go back to the ready here. Okay. And this algorithm is a classic example of a preemptive scheduling algorithm. Now round robin is very fair to every single process that you have. And it is good for time sharing systems. It has higher response time also. And no process is held by a CPU forever. But what do you think is the problem we have discussed the problem in the previous class. It is dependent on the time quantum. Okay. It is dependent on the time quantum and because of time quantum what can happen now. Exactly. It will have too many context switches or two less context switches. Okay. So we are saying if we have P1 P2 P3 which takes 10 seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds. Now if the time quantum just selected was only one second. Don't you feel that you will have too many context switches right too many context switches will mean that extra memories being utilized extra overhead is there because you need time to reload the memory. Okay. Save the memory. So this is not very good. The overall performance will be lowered. Right. If you go ahead and choose a time quantum very very big. If time quantum is 30 second now at this moment. Don't you feel like this looks like FCFS now. First come first serve. There is no priority. Whatever is coming first executing for very long time. So this round Robin is heavily focused on time quantum. It is dependent on time quantum. And it can have two problems either it behaves like FCFS or even worse it is going to have too many context switches which will bring down the performance of the CPU because it is not doing a useful task. Okay. Now my second question to you is that what if all the processes are not. The process are not of the same type. Should system processes and normal processes all stand in the same queue. We did see that they are different kind of processes. Right. They were system processes they were user processes. And as of now what we are doing there is one single queue and in this single queue only system processes also going user processes also going. Is that a good idea. Do you think this is a good idea. Should the processes always go in the same queue. And will it be fair to the processes. No definitely not some processes are more important than the others and they are different in nature like we have system process interactive process batch process background process. So for this what we want to do instead of having one single ready queue we can have multiple ready cues for different kind of process and whatever process is coming in then can join the respective queue. Okay. They can join the respective queue now don't you feel like now the priorities be much better assigned. Okay processes are divided into different categories. So in general I can say maybe I have four cues one for system process one for interactive process one for batch process one for background process and then because they are separate separate cues. I can also apply different CPU scheduling algorithms also. Which gives me much more flexibility to decide how I want to control my processes like maybe if I have a system queue I will do priority based on doing if I have an interactive queue I will do round robbing scheduling if I have the batch queue which is very low importance I will use first come first. So every process will come in a different system process will have the highest priority inside this also they can be different categorization different priority set interactive queue will have middle priority this is the balance task which you are receiving again internally also they can be multiple other priorities in batch queue also you have very small processes. Okay so like this different different task can be picked from different different cues and see how does the scheduling becomes so much more organized at the moment and every q is being handled differently because we are able to cater to their need because they are clear categories. So maybe when the CPU is picking OS can pick more tasks from here lesser tasks from here and even lesser tasks from here. So like I can say suppose there were 600 students who joined the campus I have categorized students into ABC categories. Now what do you think is the problem here everything looks great but what can be a problem here. What can be a problem. That is resolved by picking the correct amount of task and switch in. Don't you feel like if you have just come to the campus and somebody sticks you to a particular group and the groups are rigid which technically happens now isn't it a very rigorous system very rigid system. You might want to switch to a different group but because we are having the cues or the groups predestined can you move between the groups no you cannot move between the groups similarly in multi level queue also the cues are fixed and it is very rigid and any process cannot move from one queue to another which means that the lower priority queue as you said may suffer from salvation. Because think about it a process can change its behavior the first time you are loading a program it takes much more time but when you have run it for a couple of times it will take lesser and lesser time. So
should you put it into a low category because it takes more time no once it has taken more time you are earlier having it in the lowest you but you might want to shift it to a different queue as time passes. So
for this we have something very interesting and what is actually sometimes use in the OS is known as the multi level feedback queue as we are saying the processes can change behavior a less interactive process can become CPU heavy or less CPU heavy depending on the conditions that we have. So
the system should allow us to do this this multi level feedback queue is like an improved version of the previous algorithm here the basic idea is that I can move according to my will and no process will now be star wave this is much more flexible much better for interactive systems lesser or reduce salvation also and dynamic in nature. See how these can now move from any level to any level depending on how they are using the CPU. But the disadvantage here also is that it is very very complex to implement understanding how process will move it requires very careful tuning multiple parameters will be needed how many cues do you want to have what should be the time quantum of each queue what are the priority rules of every single queue that you have how does the process move between cues there are so many things which you need to worry about. And that is why it makes it a very complex algorithm however it is a very good one so now my question to you is which single algorithm is the best is there any single best algorithm. No not really depending on the task is you have picked you have to pick scheduling like here in this also you see different different cues apply different kind of scheduling if the goal is to improve simplicity you will use FcFS the more simple you want your system to be you will be using FcFS if the goal is to reduce the average wait time. Then you will use sdf if your goal is to handle important task first if your goal is to handle important task first that is when you will be using the priority algorithm if your goal is to ensure that you everything is fair. So
goodness and good response time then you will be using the round robin algorithm so depending on what you have you will be choosing it you can also use a combination of multiple algorithms like I can say sdf is not exactly a real algorithm which the systems are going to use but sdf can be used as a complex sorry as a combination of multiple algorithms. So
everything is needed in moderation and then you can create an algorithm according to you is this clear everyone and again the main goal is always to complete all the processes in time reduce wait time reduce turnaround time improve response time and maintain fairness and that is all. So
in today's class we focus more on the concepts and intuition on how the processes will work how CPU scheduling works how movement happens in the next class it will solve a lot of numerical which will be based on all the algorithms and will be calculating these times. All these times will be calculated we will also see course of the different algorithms that we have before we end the class I have a couple of quizzes for you pretty easy quizzes I believe all of you can answer them. Please answer this. Okay here as well throughput means that the we are going to complete more processes per unit time which means that complete more work in less time. So
if the processes which are completing are more throughput is going to be higher and higher answer the next one what is the main problem of fcfs. So
fcfs may lead to convoy effect which means that smaller processes are waiting for their turn where a very large processes executing because fcfs is going to be a very large process. So
this process is executing because fcfs is going to be non preemptive no process can leave the CPU until it is done with its job answer the next one. Thank you. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .