you you you you you you you you you you And only, only of them works or none of them works. So that is what we ensure using transaction. And the last isolation we will talk about database in a multi threaded environment, meaning what happens when concurrency hits databases. It happens when there are multiple people, multiple resources trying to access the same table, the same entry, the same record in the database and how do we cater to that. Now, given here you have to understand that this is a course on database fundamentals. So today we are going to be talking about the fundamentals of indexing, meaning why indexing is a concept is required, what exactly is indexing, how do you create and delete indexes. And what happens if too many indexes are created onto a table, what is the drawback of creating an index into a table or schema or on our database. How does indexing as a concept works, we are going to introduce that. We are going to be talking about the concept of beat. B plus 3 will not be out in this module. For B plus 3, the discussion would happen in the advanced database course, which would be apart your computer, not for that discussion. It is going on right now for one of the C year batches. I think it is for the C year. That is where the deeper implementation of B plus 3 as a concept will be covered, where you will be taught into the actual insights of how an index works on a root level. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if you are good to start with this session. So, the first foremost question that we have is why doing indexing as a concept is required. Now my question to all of you present in the session would be, let us say we talk about the database that we discussed in the schema design sessions, which is the database for stream clicks. If I go to my users table, how many users can we have on Netflix or how many approximate users do you think Netflix has? So, Netflix has 325 million paid subscribers globally. And when I talk about individual profile, this translates to around 782 million viewers. What is the scale of this data everyone? Can I say this massive, it is huge right? Now I want to go and login onto my Netflix account or I want to access the profiles present in my account, right? What or how will the database perform the searching? Right now we do not know the concept of indexing. We have no idea about anything related to any user or we have no idea about how query optimization works. We just know what we have discussed. So what I am going to do is I am simply going to execute this query, select star from, now I think the name was user account, right? User account where account ID is equal to 567289. Let us say this is my account ID, okay? First of all my question to all of you present in the session will be how many entries in the user account table will have the user ID equal to 567289, only one, right? Because it is a primary key of that particular table. So I am looking for a single record in this particular table. How will my SQL or what will my SQL do to execute this particular query? Search the required row which is going to contain the account ID is equal to 567289, right? Now what exactly do you mean by search? So what SQL, the standard approach for searching in SQL is one by one it will go to each and every row in the table and for each and every row it will take the desired attribute and its value whether it is equal to 567289 and the moment it finds a match it will return. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the yes or no? Yes. So what it will do is search row by row on the entire table and this concept this way to search is called as a full table scan, right? A full table scan occurs when the database examines every row in a table to find the matching record, right? Now my question to all of you present in the session is is this an optimal way to search for a record? No, this is not an optimal way to search for a record. This is going to be in my system, right? But then my next question to all of you will be what approach or is there anything that I can do in order to make sure that the searching gets optimized? Sorting. Why will sorting make searching more optimized? We can use binary search or something we can use. We are going in the right direction, right? In the user account if of the account IDs magically somehow gets arranged in the sorted order, right? 1, 2, 3 and so on till 567289 56729 and so on. Meaning if all the records in the table are present in the sorted order, right? What we will be able to do is we will be able to perform something like a binary search, we will be able to optimize the time complexity of search from a linear time complexity to a logarithmic time complexity. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody. But now the problem is that data in the databases is not present in the form of an array or data in the databases is not present in a continuous location. Data in the databases is not something that we can ideally store in a sorted order. So then what do we do here? How do we make sure that we are able to have a sorted order present on the basis of the account ID where I know if this is the account ID, go to this particular location in the memory. Everybody first of all can you give me a thumbs up if you understand what the problem statement is, the problem statement is that if this would have been an array, if the data was present in a continuous location, even if this would have been a linked list, there was some link between these locations. I could have done something to sort them, right? But right now data is not present in the hardest in continuous location and again it is not easier to move the data around in the hardest case well, performing any operation on the hardest case very slow which is something I would not want to do. So I do not want to change where the data is being stored. What I want to do is I would create a secondary table, right? Where I am going to have the attribute which I want to be kept in the sorted order and along with that attribute, I am going to store the location where that particular record is present in the memory. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? So what I am going to do is I am going to create a secondary table here which is going to have all of the account IDs present like this and there are certain locations. The address of the memory where the record for this particular account ID is stored. Now whenever there is any data that is present here, there is no need to sort this data. There is no need to move or work on the original data. There is no need to change the order of the original data. There is no need to see where the original data is stored. All we are going to do is we will modify this secondary lookup table that we have created. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present here. Yes. And this is what is called as indexing. And when you create indexing what you basically need to do is you need to create index onto any particular attribute. The moment you create an index on any particular attribute, the data is all like a secondary table. A lookup table is automatically created where the attribute is present in a sorted order along with its locations which means now you can do a binary search onto the attribute. Find out the location in the memory of the attribute very intimately just go and access that particular data point. Anybody a thumbs up if this is clear please give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present here. Atharva, what we have done is we have just looked at our accounts table which was present in the stream clicks. We saw that the scale of the accounts table can be very huge. Netflix has around 325 million paid users whereas profiles are 782 million profiles which means if I execute the select query and I go row by row to search for the required record it is going to become very unoptimal for me as a solution. So I need to figure out the faster way to find the data on the basis of the account ID. Now one solution provided by you people was that we can arrange the data in the sorted order based on the account that is not possible because this is not a linear memory. So therefore what we have done is we have created a secondary table which is called as the index table or the indexing where I have the account ID and with each account ID I have the address of where that account ID is stored in the main memory so that I can access it easily. At the same time everyone what I am also going to do is I am going to make sure that the account ID is present in a sorted order so binary search can be applied onto it. It sends to everyone. But I will take a step back. I will just take a step back and I would like to clarify to everybody presenting the session that this is not exactly how it is done in the databases. This is the core idea this is the core concept. Every search gives you a time complexity of log of n. We will eventually have a time complexity of log of n but there is a problem with maintaining a table like this and having a binary search. I will tell you what the problem is. Look up for a data is log of n but the moment you have to insert a new element into this table what will be the time complexity for doing that n and that is why a linear table does not make sense here. That is why eventually what we are going to be discussing is we are going to be discussing a tree like structure that is used to store this but the core idea still remains same. The indexes to be present in a way that searching becomes optimal searching becomes logarithmic on the basis of an attribute that you want. Everybody thumbs up with the concept of indexing makes sense to all of you present in the session. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present in the lecture. Thank you. To understand the real life example of how indexing works we can just simply try to look for a book any sort of book that we have seen which initially contains an indexing of all the chapters that are present in the book. Chapter number one present on this to this page number. Chapter number two present on this to this page number. Chapter number three present on this to this page number. This never stores the real data index just is a shortcut for you to find out where the data is present in the book or in the memory location. Now data bases are very, very smart. Why do I say that? The reason why I say that is because if I talk about my user account stable. Internally inside the system I know that each and every user will be identified using its user ID. But when you log in on to the platform. Will you be using your integer user ID to log in on to the platform? No, how will you be logging on to the platform? What will be your approach to log on to the platform? Email or username user ID some sort of things, right? So if that is how we are going to be accessing the platform, should I not have an index created on the email ID as well? Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now is it possible that I might also access my account with the help of my mobile phone? Yes, I can do that. So should I have an index created on my phone number as well? Yes or no? Yes. So ideally the point that I am trying to make is that there is not just one single attribute on which an index can exist in the table. An index can be created on one attribute, composite attributes which is a combination of multiple attributes. We will have a look about that as well in some time or multiple indexes can also be created in the same table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now, there are some default indexes that exist the moment you create a table. Can anybody tell me what are those default indexes that exist? No, no. Every table will not have a user name, right? Key. Which key? Primary key. So the first default index to exist in the database is on your primary key, right? Yes. Key is an attribute that is always indexed in the databases. Your primary key is an attribute which is always something that we can use for doing an optimal search in the database. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the yes or no? Yes. Point number two. Anything else that has index automatically created for it? Even knows about any other attribute. So the second constraint is whenever you define any attribute to be unique. If you have defined any attribute to be unique, for example, your email address, for example, your phone, if you have said that this attribute will be unique, the table will automatically create an index on to that attribute. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present here in the lecture. So, go. Now, apart from the primary key and the unique attribute, can you think of any other constraint for which we should definitely create an index? And again, I am just asking on the basis of your hands here. What are the other attributes on which we might need to frequently query a table? Is there any other type of key that exists in the table? Sorry. Any other type of key that exists in the database? We have the primary key. We have a unique constraints. What are the other type of keys that are present in the databases? Forn keys. Forn keys. What are forn keys used for? What is the biggest purpose of forn key? To access other tables. How do we do that? Joins. So, whenever a join is performed, for example, if I am going to be using the account ID as an attribute in any other table, and I am going to be performing a join, what is the condition that I use in the join? Where this dot account ID is equal to this dot account ID. Now, for whichever table the account ID is the primary key, there the account ID is already indexed. It will be very easy to find that account ID. But the case where the account ID is not indexed, which is my secondary table or the dependent table. In that particular case, when you will have to find the record that you need to join with this particular table, can I say it will become very difficult to find the record or perform the search if the forn keys not indexed in that table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? So, that is why generally it is a practice that forn keys are also preferred to be indexed again for large tables. For tables where a full scan will lead to an unoptimized search. If I talk about in my streamflix database, a table like Regents, a table like Languages, where I know even if streamflix exists for a thousand years, the table is not going to cross a thousand entries. Is there a requirement of creating an index on to that particular table? Everybody present in the session? Yes or no? Is there a requirement on creating an index on to that table? No, there is not. Indexing, please remember is something that you have to use very, very wisely. Why you will have to use index very, very wisely? The reason why you will have to use index very, very wisely is still. Let me ask this question to you people, right, which is what do you think can happen in a database if too many indexes are created? What will be the issue that we might face in a database if I create too many indexes? Or what is the bottle that deck creating an index brings into the picture? What do you think can be an issue that I can face when I create index in on to a table? So, what is an index? What are we trying to achieve here? What do you think we are trying to achieve on to this particular table which is my user account? What is the purpose? Why are we actually trying to create an index? Why is sorting required? Why? Anybody else can you help me understand like why do you think what will be the issue that I might face because of creating an index on to a table? What additional changes it would require? What additional effort it would require whenever an index is maintained on to a table? Anybody? Yes, what do you think I might face as a problem when I create an index on to a table? Imagine a table that has sorted data. What is the issue that we are trying to achieve? So, what are the different types of operations that we have discussed in secret? Is searching the only operation that we have talked about in databases? No. Along with searching what are the other type of operations that we have present in our databases? We have create operation, we have update operation, we have insert operation and we have delete operation as well. So, at any point of time there is a possibility that a record from this particular table can be deleted. A record from this particular table can be updated. As simple as a user can also come and update its email address. The moment a user update its email address does the index that you have already created? The index that you have already created is that valid any longer? Is the data present in that particular index valid any longer? Is it present in the sorted order or an order which will help you in optimizing the searching? No, it is not. Which means whenever search and whenever there is a, whenever the delete that happens on to a table on which an index is created, reindexing of the entire data needs to be done. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Everybody thumbs up if this is clear to you or thumbs down if it is not making sense to anybody present in here. Just give me one second. You So, ideally when we talk about index is a concept right the biggest myth about an index is that creating more index will always lead to a faster search. Which may be right that if there are index is created on to any particular table, any particular attribute or any particular set of attributes. Searching on those set of attributes is going to become very very optimal right but what about when we have the update operation? What about when we have the create operation? What about when we have the delete operation? Right every single time there is an operation that updates the existing data in any way that modifies the existing data in any way. Indexing has to be calculated again and now what you need to understand is that the indexing has to be calculated for all of these users right. In index or reindexing a table is not a small operation that itself will be a very heavy operation right. Which is where we have to understand that indexing is also a trade off indexing as a concept is also not something that you can just deploy anywhere that you want to be able to achieve a faster query. No you cannot be able to perform or create an optimized database you will have to make sure to use index is very very very careful right. So let me write all the discussion points. So what is an index? An index data structure that helps the database locate the rows faster right index stores the value of the attribute on which we are creating the index. And the row location into the database where that particular record is present. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes. Now as an important note we discussed at the primary key and unique attributes of table. Table or automatically indexed and automatically indexed for other attributes in the index or right. Again one table can have multiple indexes can be composed. Table or index. So what I have yes. So what we will discuss in this session in sometime makes sense yes. That is okay. That is also something that we will answer when we will discuss this right. Can you build a tree which can have multiple nodes with the same value. So binary search tree with a has binary search tree as a concept been taught to you yes. Can we have duplicates present in the binary search tree. Can we have nodes two nodes present with the same value in the binary search tree. How can you say no? What is the binary search tree? Anybody can use two? That is the binary tree. Okay. Binary search tree as a concept has that been covered in the DSM module. Binary tree is a concept has that been covered. You know what a binary tree is right. A binary tree is a tree where every node can have a maximum of true children. Now what is a binary search tree? Binary search tree is a special type of binary tree where for a node all the elements in the left will be less than or equal to that node. All the elements in the right sub tree will be greater than that. So that when you go to the node and you are looking for an element let us say X. First of all you can check if the node contains the value X. If not the node will tell you whether if X is present in this tree will it be present in the left of the tree, left of the node or the right of the node. Because the elements are present in a specific order that is what binary search tree is. And the binary search tree is what helps us in optimizing searching that is the whole purpose of a binary search tree. So the indexes that we are going to create will be stored in the form of something similar to a binary search tree not exactly a binary search tree. It is a B plus tree that is used will talk about what a B plus tree is towards the later part of this session. Makes sense to every given present here. Now the example that I was talking about is where to find? Why do you want to find them? That is what your data is management systems of all right. That is the purpose of a database management system to create the index and to maintain the index and to interact with the index. What will your responsibility be? Your responsibility will be to type create I will see this index of creating index create index name of the index which attributes you want to create the index on that set. That is our responsibility. We are not concerned with how indexes are being stored internally as of now. Now we are talking about understanding the concept of indexing. How it is stored internally will also be covered in great depth in the advanced DBMS. Makes sense right. But if you want again share some resources that you can use to understand how the indexes are created and how your database interacts with those indexes. We as a database user never have to worry about that. Makes sense. So you have to go to a table to create an index automatically. That situation will never happen. We are just going to be using a defined syntax to create index on one or multiple attributes of a given table. Makes sense. Now the question is you have an employees table in your database where you have the following attributes. You have the employee ID. You have the employee name. You have the department ID. And you have the salary. We will talk about the syntax of creating an index. But let us say what we do is you create an index index department salary on the employees table on a combination of department ID and salary. So what you have done is you have created an index which is basically a combination of department ID and salary. Everybody your thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Yes. Now my question to all of you present in the session is. Which of these filtering becomes optimum? First, where department ID is equal to 2 and salary is equal to or salary is let us say greater than 50. Everybody present in the session. Do you think this is a filter that the index that we have created will help us optimize? Is this a search that the index that we have created will help us optimize every one of the years or no? How many on favor of yes, can you please raise your hands? How many in favor of no, please raise your hands? Why do you think it will not help us in optimizing the given condition? But here in this particular case when we are giving salary greater than 50,000 can I say we have to fetch multiple records as an output right? For example, if you index the department ID and the salary you have created a table of it. There will come a point where the department ID will be 2 and all of the records after that will have a salary greater than 50,000. You need all of those records. So, in that case you will get an empty record right? You will get empty record but the point is that the data is arranged on the basis of both of the attributes not just one of the two attributes right. So, even if there is a condition where we have a greater than or less than meaning even if there is a condition where multiple records are matching on to that condition indexes can help us fetch those records as well optimal. It is not always about doing a point search make sense? Now, the answer to this particular question is yes because we have created an index on to both of these attributes which is department ID and salary fetching any records where we are putting a filter on to department ID and salary is going to become optimal. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the lecture. But, some index stores addresses will and knows exact location as a pointer then why we need reindexing minus reindexing is required for the order in which the elements are present in the table or in the order that needs to be maintained which is going to support an optimal search reindexing does not means I am recalculating or re finding out the location where all the elements are present. No, I am figuring out the order in which the elements are present in the structure given that the value for some of the attributes or some of the entities have been updated. Does that make sense mother? This is the part that is leading to a reindexing the link is not a part that is leading to indexing right super. Sir, what if whenever we decide to change an entry we just delete and replace it where it should belong so again. We do not know how indexes are stored so that is a question that I would leave for the later part of the session but I am going to answer that question. If you talk about the actual database record where it exists records are randomly scattered it is not like records are present on a specific memory location or there is a fixed contiguous chunk of memory reserved for one table that is not how data places. Make sense, Ruzoha? So, it is not like if you are deleting a record and inserting a new record it is going to go and get inserted in the place where the existing record was deleted. So, whenever you delete a record that part of memory goes to your free memory pool and whenever a new record is being created whatever memory you have required will be accessed from the free memory pool it can be present anywhere in the available free. Great. Now, second question that I have for all of you presented the session is. Let me launch it as a quiz. So, the question is do you think the query written here which is where department ID is equal to 7 this particular filter will be optimized to increase index on the combination of department ID and salvy. Super. Super. So, here almost 80 percent people were able to give the correct answer. Now, try to relate it to. So, has the concept of custom comparator or creating a comparable function in. In the in DSA in sorting right how do you sort any particular list on the basis of an attribute which is not a part or the derived which is a derived attribute or not the value of that attribute right we have covered that. So, in particular case everyone have you ever performed the sort sorting where there is a sorting required on two parameters. For example, there is a list that is given to you where you have the start time and the end time present right you want to sort all the elements from the basis of the start time but if the start time is same you want them to be sorted on the basis of the end time have you sorted something like that. How is the data range even in case of our databases right when we use order by clause in the order by clause if there are multiple attributes that we want to sort on the basis of can I say the precedence is always given to the first attribute in the order in which the attributes are mentioned. For example, here also if in the index that the first attribute is the department ID what is going to happen is that the prime will be present sorted on the basis of the department ID right now for cases where the department ID is same the data will be sorted on the basis of the secondary attribute which is your. Sal and that is your combination and even a condition greater than can be very easily optimised department ID will never be. That is okay it does not have to be unique for you to be able to create an index on it. For employees will department ID not be seen? Won't there be multiple employees with the same department, right? So there will be a lot of employees belonging to the same department and department ID will be seen for other employees, right? So the cases where the department ID will be seen, the employees will be sorted on the basis of the salary of the employees. Again, when I say sorting the reason for me to say sorting is because that is what we are capable of understanding. The moment we move to a T-base structure, right, we cannot visually imagine how data will be present in that particular tree. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Visually, we cannot imagine how sorting would work onto a table because that concept is entirely executed in a different way. What we can relate to is the concept of sorting that is the same kind of optimization that the tree will bring. The only difference is that in a tree even the insertion time complexity will become better, not just the search time complexity. Even the update time complexity will become better, not just the search time complexity, right? Now the third question that I have for all of you is, if this is the query that I have written, will this query be optimized with the index that I have created? Let me ask this as a quiz as well. Everyone can you answer this question? So majority of the people have given the incorrect answer. So here what you need to understand is that when we are creating an index onto a composite attribute or what we call as a query, as a composite index, it is not going to be two separate indexes that is going to be created one for department ID in the second one for salary. It is going to be a combined index which is basically called as a composite index, okay? Now here in this particular case, the ordering of the attributes present in the index decides how the sorting would work. So sorting would always be preferred on the basis of the first attribute, right? A composite index is ordered column by column. Meaning, meaning primarily the indexing would happen on the basis of the first attribute which is the department ID. Until unless your filter does not contains department ID, you cannot get the sorted order on the basis of the salary. The sorted order on the basis of the salary will be relative to a department ID. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? So if you try to filter on the basis of the secondary attribute of a composite index or the third attribute or the fourth attribute, this query is something that will not be optimized because for every department ID, we will have to fetch this data. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present here. Okay, which means that a composite index can only be used if the query starts with the leftmost column of the index. Please keep note of this. This is a very, very important point. Okay. Now, I can really tell you what are the different types of indexes that you would want to create onto this particular table to optimize the given query. So now what we're doing is we're talking about Amazon as a company. Amazon has an orders table in which I have the order ID. I have the customer ID. I have a lot of other attributes. I have the order date, order volume. Okay. Now, there are two SQL operations or two queries that I want to optimize. Okay. Customer orders after a certain date. Basically, whenever you try to go to your orders onto the Amazon, right? How do you list the orders on the Amazon? Last three months, last six months, past one year, past two years. So you want to fetch all the orders for a customer after a particular date. And second is fetch all the orders for a customer. The second request can be to fetch all the orders for a customer. And the third request can be to fetch all the orders from and to given dates or between given dates. Everybody present in the session, please take two minutes to try and think about. Another possible list of indexes that I might want to create onto a particular table in order to be able to optimize these queries. I'll just be back in a minute. you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you I I I want each and every one of you to give me a yes in the chat. Do you think this query will be optimized because of creating an index which is customer ID in order date? Yes, that is the purpose of this index. But do you think an index customer ID in order date will help me optimize the second query as well which is to fetch all the orders for the customers? Everyone will the second query also be optimized because of creating this index? Abhi kya padah savanay. If you are creating an index which is department ID and salary, the data is primarily sorted on the basis of the department ID. So whenever the first attribute is being used alone, whenever the filter condition starts with the first attribute of the index, the query is going to be optimized. So here we want the filtering on the basis of the first parameter of the index. So yes, this single index can optimize the query number two. Everybody present in the session, a thumbs up if this is clear to all of you, a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. That is great. Now let us talk about the structure of how indexes are actually stored in the databases. So this is going to be one of the most important part of this particular lecture. So before we do that, let me just give you one second. What from today session is the syntax to create an index? So basically I was just checking if we have covered everything that is to be covered in the automatic indexing as well. So I will quickly go over the part of automatic indexing one more again for you to be able to remember this more evident more clearly. Whenever you create a table for any attribute which is your primary key or is a unique attribute automatic indexes are created onto that attributes. Meaning primary key is not just an attribute that provides uniqueness to the table. Searching or primary key will also be very, very optimal. Updates on primary key will also be very, very optimal because you will be able to locate the rows very, very optimal. It can go as well but creating an index onto any particular attribute does not require that attribute to be unique. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if the difference makes sense to all of you present in the session? Unique attributes are automatically indexed but all index attributes must not be unique. For example, we can create index on data like order data as well which can have multiple attributes. I can create index onto an attribute which is customer ID which is going to be not unique in the order stable. So it is completely okay to index attributes which are not unique as well. Now the last topic that we will be covering in today's session is to try and understand how indexes are stored into the databases and how the concept of index helps inquiry optimization. Okay. Now here everyone indexes are stored in closed day structures primarily in the form of a B plus train right on the disk inside a file which is called as table spaces. These table spaces files are also cached into the memory so that the indexes can be accessed easily every time to access an index we do not have to do a hard disk look up. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session a yes or no? People have would appreciate a little bit more responses here if this is making sense to all of you. Yes. Now what is a B plus 3? So B plus 3 is basically nothing but enhanced B tree. Now what is a B tree? Anybody here knows what a B tree is? Anybody present in this session can explain to me what a B tree is? Okay. So what is a B tree let us first try to understand that? B tree is a self balancing binary search tree where nodes can have multiple keys and multiple. Generally. Everybody first of all present in the session can you give me a thumbs up with a definition of a B tree makes sense to all of you present here? Now I want you to read the definition and tell me what are the words in the definition that are not making sense to you right now. Let us try to understand the core elements that are being used to create a B tree. The first core element that is being used to create a B tree is our binary search tree. So what is a binary search tree? So binary search tree is a tree where? For all the nodes x. So this is what a binary search tree is a tree where for every node x present in that binary tree all the elements of the left are less than or equal to x and all the elements in the right. Meaning all the elements in the entire left subtree not just the left child the left subtree are less than or equal to x all the elements in the right subtree are greater than x. Everybody thumbs up if this is making sense to all of you present in the session. Let me give you an example of a binary search tree. When you have a look at this tree and tell me whether this given tree is a binary search tree or not. Please have a look at the binary tree that is present into your on pair of screens and tell me whether this given binary tree is a binary search tree or not. Everybody yes or no? Can you give me a thumbs up or a thumbs down in the chat all of you whether this given tree is a binary search tree or not. Let me launch quiz. Okay. So here it is here even this is not a binary search tree where this not called as a binary search tree is if you will go back to the above conditions the elements in the left as the n equal element on the right are greater than equal to it greater than x which means the only reason why we would not call this a binary search tree is because of 10 being present on both the sides of 10. Equality can only be present on one side. So if you remove this 10 now you can call this a binary search tree. Everybody present in the session the thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present here. Now what are the benefits of a binary search tree the benefits of a binary search tree are that you can perform searching of any particular element in the time complexity of order of height of the tree. Meaning if I am looking for 7 I will start from this 10 is this equal to 7 no. So I will simply ask okay if a 7 might be present where will it be present in the left or in the right. It will say in the left we will go to 6 is it 7 no. We will check where is it be present in the right is it 7 no. Where is 7 might be present in the left and I found 7. So the maximum number of nodes of the time complexity of the searching will be equal to the order of height of a tree at max you will just take one path from a root to a leap node. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session a thumbs down if it is not making sense to anybody. Yes or no everyone. Yes. Time complexity to searches again all of this will be covered in your DSM audio properly. There will be a lot of questions that you will solve on a binary search tree and just explaining this for whatever will be required for our understanding. Now time complexity for insertion also. So whenever there is a requirement of inserting a new node in the BST right. The way to do that is by figuring out where that node should be present whenever you reach an empty spot insert that node. For example if I want to insert another 6 I will start from 10 I will see where can a node be present. 10 will tell me on the left now I read 6 I ask 6 here where can a 6 be present 6 will be like it is equal on the left I reach 4 I asked 4 here 4 where can a 6 be present 4 be like on my right I see there is null on the right whenever you find a null that is where you can insert the new node 6. So the time complexity for insertion will also be order of height of the tree. Similarly delete also would work in the same way. So the position on binary search tree is a little bit of a different concept that is a module but there also the time complexity comes out to be bigger of height of the tree. Now the bigger question is if everything depends on the height what can be the worst case height of a binary search tree without any constraints on it. What can be the worst possible value of the height of a binary search tree what can be the biggest possible value of the height of a binary search tree if there are n nodes present in the BST. n it can be a skewed tree right where the height of the binary search tree can become n something like this 1 2 3 4 5 6 10 8. But my question to all of you present in the session will be will a binary tree like this binary search tree like this will be of any benefit to me will it be of any use to me no because the worst case time complexity to search will become big of edge which is big of n. The reason of using a binary search tree was to be able to optimize the search time complexity a height of n will completely destroy the purpose of that that is why the binary search tree that we use is a binary search tree where the height will always remain equal to log of n to the base 2. Anybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes. Now the problem with this binary search tree is that the right now it is having a structure of order of log and height. But when new nodes will be inserted into this when some nodes will be deleted into from this I will not be in the control of what the structure of the tree will be right for example let us say now I want to insert a 10. I know a 10 will be inserted on the right of 7 then I want to insert a 15 will be inserted on the right of 10 20 20 will be inserted on the right of 15. So, the tree will grow bigger on one side right whenever an insertion is happening meaning it is no longer going to be height balanced it is no longer going to have a height of log n right which is where we use the concept of self balancing binary search tree you do have to understand how the self balancing work that is a very advanced level topic will be covered in if you are a part of your CP module right that is something is a topic that will be required in CP but not in DSA. So, the concept that we will be using is a self balancing binary search tree concept which basically states that whenever a new insertion or deletion happens on to a binary search tree it automatically changes its structure in order to mean sure that the height always remains log n. So, that insertion and deletion or search always remains log n can everybody give me a thumbs up first of all of the concept of a binary search tree and the concept of a balancing binary search tree makes sense to all of you present in the session self balancing binary search tree. Now, what is the difference between the self balancing binary search tree and a binary search tree? Can anybody explain that to me or does anybody know? So, the difference between a tree and a self balancing binary trees again I will start with the reason and the purpose of that. When we talk about our memory hierarchy can you all tell me what is the slowest form of memory that exists on our computers? Hardware. Even after creating an SSD it is still not fast enough as fast as our main memory right it is still very very very soon. So, can I say that every single read operation or update operation or any sort of operation that we perform on to the main memory is going to be very very very heavy. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you it is going to be the slowest form of operations that we would perform right. Now my next question to all of you present in the session is if there are 1000 entries that I want to fetch from the main memory does it make sense to have 1000 calls on to the memory? Does it make sense to have an interaction with the memory 1000 times does it make sense to fetch only one single record or one single entry from the hard disk at a time or in one single read query no right. So, can I say that one single read operation should support a chunk of memory being fetched from the hard disk. There can be a maximum limit on to that there can be a minimum limit on to that but we would always prefer to fetch a chunk of memory from the hard disk not just one single point of memory right. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes and that is what our B tree is going to support. When we talk about a binary search string in a binary search string here if you see one node only it gains one value. Can everybody give me a yes and this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. In a binary tree or a binary search tree one node only supports one value that is not the case in a binary search tree or that is not the case in a B tree. A B tree supports multiple keys in the same node. Again in a binary search tree we have a restriction of two nodes or two children for a given node. We do not have the same restriction in a B tree. A B tree is basically generally referred to as order M B tree meaning maximum M children can be there. Now let me give you an example of a B tree. Let me give you an example to understand what our B tree is. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Absolutely correct. So now in the case of a binary tree because we only have exactly one value right the subtree will exactly be partitioned into two parts one is left one is right left always being less than equal to the key right always being greater than to the key or the node in a B tree what we have is we can have multiple keys present in the same node which means multiple partitions will be created in the children. For example if in the root node I only have one key which is 100 everything less than equal to 100 will be present on the left everything greater than 100 will be present on the right but here because I have two keys right there will be three partitions that will be created less than equal to 35 greater than 35 but less than equal to 65 and greater than 65. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session what is the difference between a binary self balancing binary search tree as well as what a B tree is yes. Now here you can control how many partitions can one node have or what is the maximum number of keys present in one node what is the maximum number of children can one node have because children also depends on the number of keys right basically if you have two keys present here you can have a maximum of three children if you have n keys present here you can have a maximum of n plus one children can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session so generally for an m order B tree maximum number of children is allowed for a node or m which means the maximum number of keys that can be present in any given node will be m minus one. Now everyone this is the structure that is used to create indexes one more important thing which is inside a node the keys will always be present in the sorted order why will the keys be present in the sorted order so that we can apply binary search on to the keys to find the children easily everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session any questions anything that is not making sense anything that you would want me to know I will be happy to explain that now here you have to understand that in our databases when we are going to be using the concept of B tree these keys will not exist on its own every single key or a data point that is going to exist inside the B tree is going to exist along with its pointer to the table on the record which it represents can everybody give me a thumbs up to all of you present in the session yes or no everyone that that also support are greater than or less than quick so that the data is segregated into a range right we can very easily support both greater than or less than operations as well with the help of a structure like a built right now now again B tree is also not what is used in databases to create indexes what did we mention in the beginning what is used B plus tree and enhanced version of B tree so what is a B plus tree so here everyone the biggest difference between a B tree again we do not have to specifically go and understand B plus tree into that much detail we not going to be doing that but I will tell you the fundamental difference between B tree and B plus tree the fundamental difference between a B tree and B plus tree if you see a B tree in a B tree what I have is I have data present across all the levels of a tree can everybody give me a yes and this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes there is data present across all the levels of the tree right what will a B plus tree give me a B plus tree will give me a better visibility by ensuring that in the remaining tree you only have these keys present all of the data that is required is moved to the leaf of the tree is pushed down to the leaf of the tree how it is done why it is done I do not care about that all it means this all of the nodes in the level above the leaf node are used as routing nodes it will tell you where to go the actual data will always be present in the leaf node of a tree again why this is a enhancement that is done specifically for using binary tree in databases or file systems to ensure consistency to know where to fix the data from everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session basically B plus tree is just where you perform a separation of the data and the keys but that is not something that you to conceptually understand conceptually if you are able to understand this this much is fine for you to understand how data or indexes are moved into my databases right. Okay second more enhancement that is present in the B plus tree is that in a B plus tree all the leaf nodes are also connected to each other through a linear chain do we know what a link list is yes so sort of similar to a linked list a structure is created for the leaf node where from a leaf node you can go directly go to the next link node using the next pointer have you solved a question in binary search where you are asked to update the next pointer of each node using a level order traversal approach yes similarly a next pointer will be present for all the nodes which are our leaf nodes and we can permit chain of nodes for the leaf node as well how is it helpful don't worry about that right. Now now every with the concept of the tree makes sense to all of you present in the session let's quickly talk about the syntax of creating an index as well and we will be done with the session now we have definitely covered more than what was required to be covered so you have a very very good clarity now on how indexes again if you will listening if you are not listening then so what is the syntax to create an index create index the name of the index on to which table and the list of the columns that will participate into that index creation everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no yes at the same time everyone there is one more syntax that exists for index creation which is create unique index now what does create unique index ensures create unique index ensures that whatever index that you are creating can only be created on to attributes which are unique in nature it is basically again used for creating index for a combination of unique attributes for single unique attributes we know they are already indexed we don't have to create a index again that is just a waste of memory but for combination of attributes where we have to ensure we are only selecting the unique attributes you can use the create unique index keyword then as you will move forward right as you will move forward with advanced concepts of indexing you will also talk about something which is called as your clustered versus non clustered index we are not going to be talking about that in this session okay Now index once created can be removed as well to remove an index now if you want to remove an index that you already created this index for that will be drop index the index name on the table name on which the index has been created right can everybody give me a yes if this syntax of so make sense to all of you present in the session yes not create an index on to attributes which are a part of multiple tables right if those attributes that are participating in the join operation are indexed separately in the two tables then the join will automatically be optimized but you cannot create indexes on to a specific query or attributes from different columns different tables together that is not possible indexes are only created on a single table used to optimize search on that particular table so if you are joining using employ idea on both the sides you can create indexes and employ idea on both the sides that will optimize the join automatically because that will optimize searching on the basis of that in employ idea make sense super now there are some differences in the syntax depending on which version of sequel that you are using meaning if you are using my sequel then you will always have to make sure to add the table name on to the indexes whereas if you talk about post-grace sequel in that particular database there is no need for the table name to be created which means that the index name has to be unique in the complete system all together which is a condition for I think sequel as well as I have to check that now you can also get a list of all the possible indexes that are created inside a table so first is show indexes from table name that will show you all the indexes from one table name again if you want to write a more generic version of the squaring including the database name also can be supported so show index from a given table name from a given database name everybody present in the session can you give me a sums up the sequel where he is to get the list of already existing indexes make sense to all of you present in the session yes super with that people then that is it from my side