you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you actual file data are not exactly the same thing rather they are stored separately. So suppose when I say a dot txt and we think of that as a file but internally what happens? File name is saved somewhere else in the directory. The directory will have the file name which is going to save the I node number and in this I node number you will find all the data which is pointing you to the data blocks which are present in the memory. So the directory entry is going to store the file name which is pointing to the I node and I node is going to be the one which stores all the meta data about the file and all the block addresses. As you refer to the block addresses then you can go to the exact data block where the file content is available. So this separation is what makes links between everything possible. Okay, the real information is connected through the I node. Is that clear? We have seen this in the previous class. Now moving on why does this link exist? Now sometimes we might want to have a file which is accessible by one or more names like I can have one file which has named as project dot TXT and file will report dot TXT. So both names are actually referring to the exact same content over here. First bench. Okay, so same file is needed with two names. Okay, this is quite possible. Suppose I have two folders and in these two folders I want to keep a copy of my file. I might want to create a shortcut of my file. I want my I might want to have common files shared amongst everyone. So in these cases we can create multiple files which point to the exact same location. Okay, so what is exactly happening in life that we have a shortcut which is pointing to the exact same file. Now there are two types of ways or two types of link which help you achieve this. Okay, and these are known as hard link and symbol link link. Okay, so as of now I hope the idea is clear that the name is stored in directory. Directory is pointing to the I node which has the actual meta data and this meta data contains data blocks which are in a particular memory location. Now I can have multiple file names pointing to the same I node and hence pointing to the exact location in the memory. Okay, so we are talking about these links. Why do these links exist? Is that clear everyone any doubt as of now? Okay, so now we will move on to hard link. Okay, now what is a hard link? Hard link is like there are two file names which are referring to the same I node and that is why they are referring to the exact same data as well. Okay, we are referring to the exact actual content. Okay, now suppose if you make any edit in a what will happen if I make any edit in a what will happen? This edit will be reflected in the data blocks which means if I now access B dot TXT, you will see the edited file. Yes or no? Okay, every time because all these names are pointing to the exact same location no matter in which file I go ahead and make the changes I'll be able to observe it in the other file. Is that clear everyone? Yes or no? Okay, next thing is deletion. Now suppose if two names were pointing to one I node, I know delete the file from one place. Okay, is the file deleted completely? Think about it. If you create the same file at two different locations and delete one of those files is the file deleted completely? No, okay, what happens if you delete a right now, B is still referring to this I node and up until there is some link referring to the I node, I can say the file is still available in the memory file data is still existing. The data is not removed. Okay, only when I go ahead and delete all the files, then I can say all hard links have been removed. Okay, when I go ahead delete all the file names, then I can say all the hard links are removed only in this scenario. I can say file has been finally removed from the memory as well. We will see a simulation of this. Okay, next is your symbolic link symbolic link is also known as a soft link. Okay, now symbolic link is different. Okay, it is like a shortcut. So right now the shortcut is not pointing to the actual node rather it is pointing to a path. Okay, path of another file. Is that clear? Okay, so when a shortcut link is created or a symbolic link is created, we are saying that as of now because I'm not referring to the exact block. Okay, what will happen? Whatever data that you are changing in the first file or the original file will be reflected in the shortcut that is right. But even if I now go ahead and delete the shortcut, will there be any changes in data block or the number of links? No, but if I delete the actual file which was pointing to the I node, then the shortcut is not referring to any. Okay, why a shortcuts needed when the original file is located deep inside any of the folder whenever we want to keep an easier name of the file whenever we want to link multiple folders together. Then in that case, we create shortcuts. The symbolic links store a path of another file. So if the target is deleted, then the link will be broken completely and you will not be able to use the shortcut anymore. Let us see this with the help of a simulation. I hope you all can see this on the board. Right here, you see what is happening. This is representing a hard link that directory has separate separate names separate names are existing, but they are all pointing to the same I node, which means in reality, it is pointing to the exact data blocks. Is that clear? Okay, now see right now you can see here also the states a dot TXT B dot TXT project dot TXT everything is referring to the exact same file node. How many active links are there for active links are there at the moment. Now, suppose I delete a dot TXT if I'm deleting a dot TXT will the whole I node be deleted? No, see if I delete a dot TXT what happens just that link is broken. See here this link has been broken and the link count has become three at the moment. So now you see everything is still pointing to the exact blocks. Delete B. Delete B see the B file has been removed from directory, which means only the name has been removed. Has the data been removed? No data is still present over there. Similarly, if I delete project again project link is broken, but because still it is a hard link and one file, which is final project is still available data is still available in the memory also the moment I go ahead and delete final report. Now you see what happens all the links are broken as all the links are broken. I am not referring to the I node and because I'm not referring to the I node what will happen the data in the memory will also be deleted completely. This is how hard link works. Is this clear everyone? Okay, so this is a small simulator which you can try and you can animate this also just to check how you delete the elements and then your memory is getting deleted. Your memory is getting free. This is exactly how I node works any doubt over here. You click on that file and create a copy of it. So earlier in the laptops, there used to be a key of shortcut. So if you would create a shortcut of a particular app or a file, it would not create a copy. It will just create a shortcut path pointing to something. Is that clear everyone any doubt? Next is the symbolic link see the difference over here right now I have shortcut dot txt but is it pointing to an I node? No, it is not. It is rather pointing to a particular path. The path is stored inside suppose home dot users and a dot txt. A dot txt is the actual file and that path has been mentioned over here. So when you see this shortcut dot txt, it is nothing but a symbolic link. There is no way it is reaching out to the same I node. It is just containing the path or something. And the path is now going to the exact location. See if the file is existing. If the file exists, then I can open the particular file. Let us now see suppose I open shortcut what happens? If I open shortcut right now, you can see these stages that how I am able to follow through and the OS is able to open my file. See always follows the stored path and opens the file a dot txt. So the link is valid. Suppose I go ahead and delete my home. See because I have deleted my file itself target has been deleted as target has been deleted. Now can the shortcut reach your file? No, this is known as a broken link or a dangling link when you are pointing to a path. Which according to you is available because I did not delete the shortcut. But because the actual file has been removed, I am not exactly pointing to anything. So now after deleting the exact location, if I open shortcut, you see what will happen? That the link has been broken. And it is a dangling symbolic link. You can see all the stages are performed here as well. See how the actual file is deleted. The path link has been broken. But I am still storing the path. As I am storing the path, I will try to open it. But I will fail and I will not be able to open anything. Is that clear everyone? Any doubt as of now? Yeah? It is stored somewhere. It does have memory. But the memory required is very less. Like if you have a hard link, it is an exact copy of the file rather. Not even a copy. The directory memory will be used. But the shortcut just contains the path nothing else. I don't know if you have seen this in modern computers or not. So usually when you create a copy, it would look like this. This is a hard link copy. But sometimes when you create a shortcut, what happens? There is this arrow symbol coming over here. You must have seen this. This arrow is showing that it is a shortcut. It is not the exact file. So you can try this also. Try to create multiple copies of the same thing and delete one copy. You see the other ones will not be effective. But if you try to delete the main copy and then open shortcut, file does not exist. That is what is happening over here. Any doubt at this point? Any other questions? I will share this simulator with you all also. Just a moment. Well. Now you can think about it if you have any questions. Any questions at this point? Just check if you can access the simulator, you can try out multiple ways and see how this exactly works. Okay? So this is how exactly your deletion is going to work when you have hard link and symbolically link. Okay? Shall we move on? So if you see right now, if I talk about hard link, hard link is like another real name for the same file, whereas symbolic link is nothing but a shortcut that points to the path of the real file. That is the main difference over here. Any doubt? The difference table is also given over here, you can check it out. Is this clear? If ES will move on. So one of the very common interview questions is like they ask you that how is a hard link created and how the symbolically created and what is the purpose of the two? How does deletion work in both the cases? Is that clear? This thing is that if I have multiple files, if I have multiple files, by the way, this is the exact representation of the simulator, you can check it out as well. Next thing is that, suppose I have multiple files. I have multiple files or other apps, okay? I have apps which are referring to a file. Okay? They are all referring to the file. And I delete the file. What do you think happens in this scenario? Okay. Think about it. How the links are going to work and how does file descriptor works? Think about it. What was file descriptor doing? What was file descriptor doing? Can I say the file descriptor was assigning a token? Basically, we say that the moment a file is open, we are assigning a file descriptor. And I told you that now whenever any app is going to work on this file or you are going to work on this file, you are working on the file. The file descriptor and not the file name. Okay? Now, when I delete a directory, okay? When I delete a directory, what is going to happen? The file name is being deleted. So the link which you have from that directory has been removed. Okay? But because the app is still working with the file descriptor, it will be able to work on the old data. Okay? So the app opens the data.txt file. You delete this file. Data.txt is going to disappear from the folder. But the app which had this file open can still use it. So only when this app closes the file, you will be able to delete the block completely. See, that is what happens when you try to delete the file. And some app is using it in the background. It gives a U.S. pop-up that this file is still being used in the background. So first close that app and then you will be able to delete it. So that is a safety mechanism for this. Because according to you, you might have made changes through the application, but it will not be updated. So if you have a file that you have been using, you can use it in the background. So you can do the application, but it will not be updated anywhere because the file does not exist in reality. Okay? Is that clear? So deleting a file removes the name from the directory, but if an app already has it open, the actual data is going to stay up until that app has been closed as well. Is that clear? Everyone? Any doubt at this point? Next thing is a crash safety mechanism, which is known as journaling. Okay? Now, what do you think journaling is? Normal human terms. What do you understand by journaling? See, whenever we are updating any file system, we need a lot of data. We need the file data. We need the I node or the metadata. We need the file names stored in the directory and the free block information. Okay? So all these things need to be updated after every single operation. Now, if the power fails, the system will become inconsistent. So to reduce this risk of inconsistency, many file systems use journaling. Okay? So what happens over here that they are going to make a pre-planned metadata changes before applying them completely. So if a system crashes, the file system can use a journal. Okay? This is maintained in form of a cache or some space in RAM. And from that, you can update the inconsistent state. So journaling is going to help you maintain file system consistency after the crashes have been created. Okay? It records all the metadata changes before applying them in real time. So that whenever your system is trying to recover, you can simply copy all the data from the journal. Okay? Is that clear everyone? Okay? Very basic concept. Go ahead and ask if you have any questions. So cache is going to maintain data about a particular process only. That was page caching, right? Or a particular write operation or read operation. But right now, if you see, I'm not talking about write operation or read operation. Rather, we are talking about the complete file itself. Okay? How the file data is maintained. Okay? I'll be right. Okay? Then how the metadata has been changed. Remember when you were talking about page caching, we were just talking about the reading, writing, operation and the offset. Right now, it is much more than that. Was the file deleted somewhere? Have any, the blocks which the file was using, have they been freed? Okay? Has the owner changed, has the permission changed? All that information will be the project. Okay? So again, see the previous two classes were like the base of it. We have grown from the process to the file to the disk. And that is what we are talking about. Okay? Any question at this point? Any question? Okay? So just for crash consistency to maintain every single data about the file and the metadata about the file, journaling is required. Okay? So right now, think about any transaction log that happens, any freeing up that happens, any breaking of hard links on symbolic links, everything is recorded over here. Whereas in page cache, you are just seeing that right now, I'm storing data of the file. Okay? That's why I'm saying that I don't have to go to the disk to read data rather I'll just stay on the page cache. Okay? We'll see that as well. If there are no more doubts, we'll go ahead and have a couple of quizzes from the previous class. I hope you remember what was right and F sync doing. Right was writing in the page cache for faster performance. Okay? And F sync was making a durable system which would copy all the cache and put it into the actual disk. Right? So we'll see a small simulation of that as well. The before that answer the next quiz. Okay? So see what happens whenever you are going to use the right command, it is a default command by the way. You are always writing in the OS cache and after the buffer of the cache is full, only in that scenario you go ahead and write it on the disk. This is known as delayed right or buffered right. Okay? Whereas if you use the F sync command, what happens? I am forcing the computer to go ahead and write in the disk directly. Okay? This is a slower operation but it enhances durability of the system because in the case of power failure, you see cache will be removed. It is volatile. Whereas if the I can say system crashes something because F sync has forced data to be written on the disk, it is not volatile in nature. It will be in the memory. Is this clear everyone? We will see a simulation and see how exactly it works as well. So let us see how cache works. So right now see I have an operation of writing balance. I can do a background flush. I can do F sync. Now you know very well that right now I have not written anything in the memory. So you see app is not working at the moment. The cache is also clean. When a cache is dirty, it means that I have written something in the cache but that has not been flush to the main memory. So as of now the cache is also not dirty which means I have not written anything over here. Disk is also having old data because I have not mentioned anything right now. So if I write balance, you see what has happened. So I have written app has written right. I am writing the balance 100 page cache value has been updated. And as of now it has not been written into the disk. And that is why if you see page cache is dirty right now. This is also a status showing that the data has not been transferred to the disk. Now at this moment if I do crash what happens. See the page cache has been cleaned. The disk still carries the old data. See it is carrying the old data and no dirty pages there which means I was not able to write anything basically. So if I reset now I say, sorry. If I reset now and write again, again see the page cache is dirty and now I do F sync. The moment I do F sync see what happens. So the cache is not dirty anymore because I have forced the data to be flush to the disk exactly. Now if I try to crash the system see nothing happens. Page becomes clean because now there is no data there. And the disk which you have has the maintained new balance. Is this clear everyone how it is working. Right yes or no any questions at this point. So this is what we studied in the previous class what happens exactly when we use right command or the F sync command. Right is always going to write in the cache itself unless and until you go and flush it out. Or if the cache is full then also it can flush out automatically like if I do a background flush in that case also the same thing will happen. Okay without system crashing also after sometime background flush is going to happen. Is there any doubt here any question. Now I will move on to a quiz it is about hard link and symbolic link. Please remember hard links are going to share one I note they are going to share one I note. They are directly connected but you definitely have to traverse through the I note to get to the actual data block. Okay it is not referring to a shortcut answer the next one. What happens when a process has opened data dot TXT but something deletes data dot TXT. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Otherwise the file is still open in the background. So with this we are done with hard link symbolic link and your crash resilient system. We have discussed all these things how allocation happens how path look up happens how files are open how files are created. How we have written in the file how we have read from the file and finally we saw how we delete from a file and then maintain durability. These are some of the important terms which we have seen again this will also carry some very important interview questions. And for the example perspective you can focus on these small numeric. I do not come as direct questions but they might come in scenario based questions or I can have a combination of multiple parameters. Okay. Now we will be starting with disk scheduling. So what exactly is disk scheduling. Because we have a very common situation where multiple programs may request storage access at the same time. So here chrome wants to read data cash. VS code wants to save a file database wants to write the transaction logs a video player is trying to read video data. And the OS wants to load a system file which is very important. Now the question which would come to your mind is whose request is served first. Does the storage device serve the request randomly. Multiple requests are the served randomly. No, for whatever we have learned we have always seen that OS has a very good reason to pick every single activity and then apply all the required changes to our system. So suppose OS receives many IO requests. Okay, all these are IO requests only. Okay, so it is going to decide the order in which they should be served. And this is known as disk scheduling. Okay, how you are going to serve the different IO requests which have been placed by multiple apps. Okay, deciding the order in which these operations would be served. Okay, today's class you will see two things. One is scheduling algorithms. You can find very simple questions in the example from this rolling algorithms and then we will also learn about some modern cases. How you have improved the scheduling algorithms and how we do not use the previous hard disk drives that we had. Okay, we'll see how it all pans out and what is being used in the current OS. So most of the earlier systems that you had were going to use hard disk drive. Okay, now in a hard disk drive a disk head is going to physically move on the tracks which are created over here. Okay, and from this track you could read or write data. All these tracks are going to have separate disk blocks. So the more the head moves the more time the operation is going to take. Okay, so a classical disk scheduling algorithm were mainly designed to reduce the unnecessary moment of this head. Okay, because if I reduce the moment of my head the performance will be improved as I will take lesser time to read data available in the tracks. Is that clear? Yes or no? Yes, so this is a hard disk drive. This is a very old mechanism. It has a physical head and this physical head is going to move in the track. The track is going to have disk blocks. Okay, and that is how you could read data. Now we don't use the system. We use something known as flash memory, but still it is important to know it. Okay, so before moving on to the algorithms they are two important things we should learn. So the C time is the time taken by the head to move from the current track. Okay, to move from the current track to any requested track. Suppose I am at 50, but the request is at 90. So how much actual time will you take to move from 90 to 50 is known as the seat time. So technically if you see the moment 40 tracks would have been covered between 90 to 50. Okay, so in reality in exams you cannot calculate seat time rather you will have to calculate the total head moment. So calculation of total head movement is very simple. Moment can be calculated by the new position which has been requested minus the current position where you are at. You had just have to take the absolute value for this and for total head moment for every single request you will calculate the head moment and add it. Okay, so I will show you the algorithms, but just for the basic try to understand this. Suppose this is the track which has been mentioned currently my head is at 50 position. Okay, now the request coming from different IOs are 60 3080. So if I am at 50 and suppose I serve 60 how much moment has been cost 10 tracks have been moved. Then the next request that you see is coming from 30 so from 60 I will go to 30. From 60 I will go to 30 again how much tracks have I moved how many tracks have I moved 30 tracks have been moved. Then from 30 or request is to serve 80 30 minus 80 50 tracks have been utilized. Think about it right now. I'm moving from 60 to 30 and then again back to 80 isn't this a lot of tracking moment because there are a lot of tracking moment I can say a lot of seat time is involved. And we want to reduce the total head moment so that the overall seat time is also reduced. Is that clear everyone? So I'll share a small visualizer with you and with the help of that visualizer we will study all the algorithms. So you will see this particular website on here. Use click on the first step. This is the disk scheduling visualizer. Now in this you can see you can choose any algorithm of your choice and see how it pans out. Okay, so right now I have given minimum track as zero maximum track at 199 which means my disk right now has 200. The tracks you can increase or decrease it according to your will the disk track will be represented in this line. Okay from 0 to 199 now you can place the current head at any point that you want to I am placing it at 50. Then you can give the request queue this is my request queue which I'll be using. First go to 82 then 170 and so on by the help of different algorithms we will see how the disk moment is going to happen. And in the same queue we will see how different track moments will be involved. Then from here if you see you can choose any algorithm of your choice there are six algorithms. Okay, these are very basic ones. You can choose the direction also which requests you want to serve first you want to go from 0 to 199 or 199 to 0. So as of now you will go ahead and we will discuss about the first come first. So what do you think happens in first come first. Whatever comes in the queue first is going to be served first. So suppose I go ahead and calculate. Okay, these are all the step moments which are going to happen as it is first come first serve my pointer was at 50 before. Okay, now the next request to be service 82. So when you animate it you will see how I am moving sorry not animated. Let us just do the first next step. So you see how I was able to move from 50 to 82 you can open it in your own laptops to see a bigger picture right now. I don't think it is very visible over here. Okay, so you see how you have moved from 52 82. So moment from 52 82 has required how many track moments 82 minus 50 it is total 32 moments. Then next step I am at 82 the next track which I have to visit is 170 because it is first come first serve. So if I do the next step you will see how far I have gone how many tracks were towards 170 minus 82 total 88 tracks. Track moments have happened. You can keep on clicking next and you will see how every next moment is traversed. Another last from 16 you have moved to 190. Okay, but these are all the track moments. Calculations so shows you how you have moved and total moment is nothing but it is the addition of every single track moment. So this comes out to be 642. Is this clear everyone? Any doubt at this point FCFS will simply serve all the requests which you are giving in the request queue. Okay, and that is how the head moment is shown. Okay, so if I see the basics of it FCFS that you have is very simple to understand again very basic algorithm. Right, but what are the pros there easy to implement also just get the queue serve it. Okay, and it is pretty fair because the arrival time is deciding the processing of the request. Okay, but what are the cons as you can see we had to make a lot of true to and fro motions because of which seek time will increase total head movements have increased as well. Okay, and I do not want this I want to optimize my performance. Okay, and it is very slow it is very slow as compared to some of the other smarter algorithms which we have as of now. Is this clear FCFS any doubt? If you have no questions we can ask a quiz. Any question first come first serve is pretty much what you have seen in the past whatever request is given that is served first and according to that only we have the disk moment. Please answer the next quiz. Requests queue has been given first arrival time is 82 then we have 170 then we have 43. Everyone please participate. The service order of request is going to be same as the arrival order itself it will not change at all. Okay, so as you see your service was your current head was at 50 service request was 82 so you went to 82 then 170 and then 43. But clearly the average head moment is a lot over here. So what can I do what is the improvement I may be and now I go ahead and I am going to serve the request which is closer to my head right now. Okay, so right now you see this is the request queue available current head is at 53 so if my current head is 53 it will try to figure out what is my nearest track in the queue. So what is my nearest track 53 is closes to 65 so 65 is the first request to be served for 65 you see close 67 67 is served next. Then for 67 the closest is going to be 37 and so on I will be moving and serving every single request. So SSTF is the algorithm which is going to work on the shortest seek time first here the request closes to the head is first served. Is this clear everyone. I think about the pro that definitely the head moment will be reduced over here. Better average seek time will be given again the idea is pretty simple easy to understand but there are calls also what was the call in shortest job first. Con of shortest job first process. Salvation correct both of you are right so what happens in shortest job first because requests will keep coming there dynamic in nature. So if you always have a shorter request the larger request will be the note same thing will happen here also and it is not always globally optimum because you still might want to move around a lot. Okay, let's see here from 14 you had to go all the way up till 98 because there was no closer requests available to you. It is not always globally optimal and you always have to keep checking if you have a nearer request. Okay, so let us see this in simulation. So we are going to use shortest seek time first and this is going to be the head moment see if I am at 50 right now I am have chosen the closest request which is 43. So see I have gone to 43 next for 43 24 is closest I will go to 24 then for 24 16 is closest I will go to 16. Next you see 16 will go to 82 and see this is a bigger moment because no request was there around 16 to fulfill it. Next from 82 I can move to 140 from 140 I have moved to 170 and from 170 I have moved to 190 and you can clearly see that how the total moments have been reduced if you remember in FCFS. The total head moments were 642 but here I was able to significantly reduce the total track moments. Any doubt at this point think about it if you have any questions. Okay, so here you see the head moment has been reduced a lot but what will happen if shorter request keep on coming so now we will see the starvation. Okay, suppose current head is at 50 and you have one request which is available at 180 track and you request keep coming. So every time I have a nearby request see how it will always keep on serving the nearby request only how the head is always happening in the nearby request and 180 is never getting served. So this is the starvation you can see the order and again see how the movement of the head is happening every single time. Okay, how the track moments are being calculated but 180 will always remain in the waiting stage and you can clearly see this is a classical example of starvation due to waiting. Okay, any doubt at this point I hope you understand the total head movement very easily just subtract the request from the current track and add the total head moments that is all that you need to do. Okay, any question. So please notice that the ST this starvation tab is different. If you want to try it on your own go to this tab and try it out. Okay, this one you can change the request Q and then try out starvation. But because this Q right now is static in nature you will eventually get to the last request. Any doubt at this point how short as seek time is working just move to the closest part. If there is no doubt go ahead and answer the next quiz my head is going to be at 50 and the pending request list has been given tell me which one will be the first request to be served. Okay, I'll go to the next shortest seek time. Okay. Okay. Okay. So what happens over here that although ssdf has improved the seek time a lot from 682 we have come down to this 200 track moment which is a huge optimization. But fairness is going to be the parameter in which we are not performing very well far away request was starving so for this we came up with another algorithm which is known as a scan disk scheduling. Okay scan disk is also known as an elevator now you to guy tell me how does an elevator function. How does an elevator function. Normal elevator the lift how does it function when you press one direction up it will keep going up and serve all the request it is not going to have a two and four motion going up and down up and down it won't do that. So if you press the up key it will always keep on serving the floors which are above you. Okay only when the lift is going down it is going to serve all the down to us in a very similar fashion what happens in scan that that the desk the head movement can be decided towards which track I want to move I want to go towards left or I want to go towards right. Okay and then it will serve all the requests on this path. Okay I will show you this through the simulation itself it will be much easier to understand. So I'm using scan right now okay and I'm using direction right so if direction is right see how the service order has changed okay the request is still the same 82 170 43 140 and so on. But if my head is at 50 am going in the right direction so it will keep on going to all the request which were in the right side. Okay it will only go to the right side okay now see in the right what is the last request in the right what is the last request. Think about it what is going to be the last request 190 and where is your track ending the track ending is at 199 so what happens in scanning that when you go to next step it will go to 199 also okay so scan says scan all the tracks from the current head to the very end of the direction which you have chosen and that's why even when there is no request beyond 190. The channel got them will move your head to the last track as well okay and this can sometimes increase the total head movements okay so it is giving it a benefit of doubt that maybe if I scan till the end everything will be available okay next now you see I have reached the very end but there are still some requests remaining on the left side okay so in the left side what will happen as I have gone to 199 and I press the next step you see it is going to be a little bit easier to understand. You see it has directly gone to the next request so from 190 it moved to 199 and then from 199 it has moved to the first request in the left which was 43 okay and then if you see it is going to serve all the request now it has gone to 16 in the next step you see it might still go till the very end okay right now we have we are not doing this because we selected the direction as right okay similarly you can change the way you want to do it. Similarly you can change the direction to left and simulate it again you will see now have how I will be going to left side every time serve all the requests till zero and from zero then it will start going back to the right direction okay that is working like an elevator serving everything what comes along the way okay is not clear everyone any doubt over here the formula for calculation of path is going to be exactly the same it is not changing how it is going to be. So I can say how the service is being done to every single request that is the only change okay the order matters formula will not change any questions over here think about it okay so for general optimization if I'm moving to the right side cover the last track but once you start moving left after that request don't cover the last track which means I don't go up to zero I'll go to the last request only like here you see go to the last request 16 only don't go up to zero okay then when you are traversing the left side in this case you will go up to zero and then serve the request on the right and again you will go to the last request 190 only you won't serve the 199 track okay this is standing any issue at this point if you have any questions go ahead and ask okay so see it has also reduced the head movement a lot because you are serving everything in one direction okay it is more fair than shortest seat time first because right now no processes waiting for a long time it's turn will definitely come eventually okay and it does have very good performance when it comes to waiting time and a lot of requests are waiting okay but what is the con what is the con at because my head is moving only in one direction whatever was left in the previous direction might keep on waiting and that can increase the waiting time okay so again you remember that in standing we were going up to the very end of the direction that we have chosen and that can also increase time because even when there is no request available I am still going forward okay and then definitely it is sometimes slower okay any problem at this point think about it so scan is an elevator algorithm it scans everything to the physical end before reversing to the other direction any doubt think about it if you have any question otherwise you will move on to the other algorithm okay please answer the next question okay okay so scan what is going to happen I am going to go to the very end and then I will also service the very last track even if there is no request and then I will reverse direction but this clearly is an issue so next we have the look algorithm look this scheduling is a slight improvement over scan and then this it is going to move in one direction but it will only go to the very last request once the last request is served then it is going to reverse itself okay so you see over here again I am going to use the right direction okay and see what is going to move in one direction okay and see what is going to happen if I keep on moving now at this point I will only go up till 190 in the scan I would have gone to 199 also but at this moment the moment I press next I have simply reverse my head and I am serving everything on the left side okay then again all the requests are served okay so accordingly total movement will also change it will not go anything beyond it similarly you can try it out for the left side as well even for the left side it will not go till the very last track rather the last request that you have after you reach the last request it will again reverse the direction head and then cover the other request is that clear everyone any doubt at this point very small improvement over the scan algorithm okay so difference between scan and look is very important scan is going to go till the very end of the track whereas look goes till the last request okay that is the only difference between the two any questions at this point go ahead and ask if you have any questions and then we will move on to the other algorithms other algorithms are like the variations of scan and look only so if you see over here look is going to avoid the unnecessary travel across the disc end okay it is definitely better than scan in some cases where no request is available in the last okay so overall good performance pretty fair as well but what if there is a request which you got which you are missing because I had to I can say serve on this one single site there was some requests waiting in the left side and you might have missed them okay and the direction reversal which happens direction reversal is also going to consume a lot of time because after you go till one 83 suppose from one 83 you have to make a very big jump to 80 sorry 37 and this is still a higher seek time we are covering more number of tracks okay so again it is a very good algorithm but it will have it will not have a globally optimal solution okay any doubt at this point any doubt just go through this once and let me know if you have any doubt and then we move on to the variations of scan and look as well let me know once we can move ahead we can also open the simulator and try out different inputs to see how the algorithm is working okay shall we have a question now so again see FCFS is going to focus on the arrival time sort the data okay the data is sorted arrival time and then it will be service SSTA for shortest seek time is going to go to the closest requests which is available to your head scan is going to go to the very end of the track and then access the data even if it is not present look is a slight improvement because it will go to the last request and not the last track available okay but it is definitely going to reverse the direction so suppose I choose look in the right look or scan both in the right they first go in the right direction after they come to the end they are going to reverse the direction and then serve the other request so the head is reversing direction okay but as you have seen that this sometimes might not give you a very optimal time okay so with this we come to see scan okay see scan is nothing but circular scan so what do you think will happen in circular scan what happens in circular scan in circular scan the head is only going to move in one single direction so if it is going to reach the end what will happen it jumps back to the beginning of the track and then moves ahead and continues in the exact same direction and that is why you will get more uniform waiting time okay again it applies to some cases okay but it can be sometimes less efficient depending on the request order from C scan and look okay so see right now I am going to use the same request queue okay here they will go are them a C scan let us go in the right direction first which means right now I am never going to reverse my head okay rest everything remains the same I am going to go till the very end of the track because it is scan will go to them itself it is just circular in nature okay suppose I go ahead so from 50 I go to 82 82 to 140 140 to 170 170 to 190 but because it is scan it will go to 190 as well now now in scan what would have happened up from 199 I would have come to the next request 16 but at this moment you will see I have come to the beginning of the track in this moment was I able to access any track and read data no I have not read any data I have simply moved my head directly from 199 to 0 okay as I have moved I will again cover all the requests in the right direction only is that clear so the head is never reverse okay that is the only change which you see in C scan okay now sometimes this might be an improvement sometimes it is not an improvement from scan and look okay any doubt any doubt again what is the improvement more uniform waiting time okay but extra boundary moment which you are performing right now that is still being counted okay any questions at this point think about it and we know if you have any question yeah request is not this little so let's see what is happening if I'm saying my available task that is why the tracks are from 0 to 199 now you can have multiple requests over here what is C scan doing that move from suppose my head pointer is over here it will move but it is scanning only right scanning is elevator algorithm so it will serve a 199 even if the request is not there okay why in reality this is important because request for dynamic in nature maybe when I was moving in the right direction some new request came in so which might be available in 199 so that is what we are trying to implement but obviously there's also a possibility that it was never there okay so this was the scan okay now in C scan what has happened I have still so other at from here itself suppose the next request is over here so in normal scan you would reverse your disc head and move directly to here and then serve all the requests in left direction okay but in C scan what is going to happen you go to zero again even if there is no request at zero so you have gone to zero while you are going to zero you are not serving anything you're not serving anything but what is happening from this again you will move to the right direction to serve all the request okay that is how you are moving okay if it was look then in that scenario again if I have zero to 199 in the look algorithm okay only if a request is present at 199 I will go there okay so suppose the head is over here I am moving to right now you can decide in which direction to move also you can move will you you can move in right okay as of now we are saying we are moving in right so suppose I move till 190 completely Now, as it is look what will it do? It will not go to the very end and start servicing the previous request by going in not from here rather from here. It will go to the left request. Is that clear? Then it won't go till the end. See, 0 has not been served till the last request only I have served it. Any doubt over here? Any question? Think about it. Guys, please go through whatever we have done. There's a lot of algorithms that might get confusing. Go through everything and tell me if you have any doubts in anyone. After this, we have the very last algorithm and that is all. We will see a quick comparison between everything as well. In case you are facing any issues in anyone, let me know. It is in some cases. The only thing is that now the averaged waiting time has been improved. Even when the service is going to 0, it is tracking that but the average waiting time has come in. Otherwise, what was happening? One single request was having a lot of waiting time. Also, the disc moment is reversing. The disc moment is less only. Waiting time is what is fluctuating over here. That's why if you might have noticed, we have clearly mentioned that because the head jump is from the end to the beginning, it is adding the additional moment. When you want a circular service, in that case, you will apply this. But always. Again, if you see that your request queue is very dynamic, you don't know where the data is coming in. So going to 0 feels like a better option. Whatever must have come, new you can service that and then service in sequence. Any other doubt? Think about it. Any other question? If not, we will have a small quiz. So here in C scan, did we reverse the direction of the head? We did not. We simply keep the same moment. Just take a jump from the very end to the beginning. Again, you can decide the direction in whichever way you want to move. One quiz from this. Okay. So here also see head is not going to reverse direction. Simply move. Okay. Next again, you still see that what happens, I am going to the very end and then reversing. So a better way to do this is again. See look. Okay. See look is exactly like look. Everything is the same. I will not serve the very last track. I will only serve the last request, but in this also the direction of the head is never changed. Okay. So suppose I apply the see look. In see look again, see how I am servicing all the requests in the right side. Once I reach 190, I will not go to 199 rather in the next step also. See, I have not gone to zero as well. I have gone till the first request which you had in the left side and that's why I am going to 16. This is a very clear difference between C scan and see look in see scan. I was going to zero. So technically I'm trying to serve all the new requests also, but see look is going to first focus on the previous request. Okay. So now if you go on forward, again, you see disc moment or the head movement. It's still in the right side only. Okay. Any doubt you can change the direction also and see what happens. How I move to the left every time then from left, I move to the very end the 190 request and then again move to the left side. Any doubt. Think about it if you have any questions. So remember that whenever you were solving questions based on this, what do you have to do keep two things in mind? How this calculation is working? How moment is tracking the total head or head movement and then add everything to get the total moment. So what can happen in the question that I give you one single request. Okay. And I might ask you to apply different algorithms and tell me which one is going to give you the least track moment. Okay. That kind of questions can come from here because the numerical is again very simple. So if you see over here, if I keep on changing, see see look for this request is giving you three 16 tracks which you have covered FCF was the worst, which has given you 642 tracks, which means too much head movement. Okay. See scan is again 3366 look is giving you the least 208 tracks covered. Okay. Scan is giving you 240 still and shorter seek time is also giving you 208. So for this particular input, you can say that SSTF and which one I guess look is in a tie both are giving you the same track moments. Is that clear guys any doubt at this point all the algorithms are very important from the example perspective. They are very slightly different. Okay. So don't get confused. Any doubt from this. So see look is jumping between actual pending request from 160 to 16 instead of the physical disc boundaries of 199 to 0. And this has a wider unnecessary disc moment. Okay, but still the jump is still there and the jump is very high. Then your total track moment is going to increase. Any doubt please go through everything what we have done and let me know if you have any doubt at this point. Okay. This illustration might seem a little confusing so it's better to see the simulator only don't focus on this too much. Okay. Again, the direction of see look up see look see scan scan and look will be given in the exam so you have to keep that in mind. Think about it go through everything. Let me know if you have any doubts. Okay. Okay. Just one more check. If you see over here this is check box which says count circular jump in C scan and C look which means that this jump which you have. The last jump which you see the red line that has to be counted in the numerical or not. And if you see in this case we are counting it if you want you can avoid this as well. Okay, but in the exam numerical so it really mentioned if I am counting this red moment of circular jump or not. Is that clear? Okay. If it is clear go ahead and answer the next question then we will see a quick difference between everything. Okay. Have see look see look is going to service the actual request which is present in the queue rather the see scan is going to move to the physical boundaries of the disk even if request is not there in the anticipation that new requests might come in. Okay. So let's go over a quick comparison between all the algorithms. I hope you all are able to understand what is the benefit of each one of them. FcFS is going to serve everything according to arrival time. It is very simple and easy to implement also. Okay. This advantages are it might have very high movement which you saw in the simulator as well first covering 6 84 tracks which is a lot. Okay then SSTF is going to serve the closest request which means the lowest seek moment over here but again starvation might be a problem whatever is the farthest request might never get served if I have dynamic dynamic requests coming in which are closer to my head right now. Next you saw scan scan was moving like an elevator it will move till the very end of the disk okay and then it will reverse the head direction now this is a very good algorithm but all because it is more systematic in nature however it is going to the disk and unnecessarily even if there is no movement or no request available rather. Okay then in look you will see that life scanning it is going to work in the exact same way service every single request why which comes in its way but it will not service the last track if there is no request available it will only go till the last request. Okay. Clearly if it is going to the last request itself it will have lesser movement as compared to the scan okay. Here remember the direction really matters a lot it is not always going to give you the optimal solution in some cases it might give you. If he scan is like move in one direction jump back and then again move in the same direction and because I am servicing the request only in one direction it will have more uniform waiting time okay because think about it if I came here and then service the very first request the waiting time of this request might increase but because in C scan I have gone here and then moved everything in the same manner waiting time is not a problem over here it is averaged out okay but definitely there is an extra boundary moment because I am going to the very beginning of the tracks then we have see look see look again is going to serve only the last request even when it is jumping back it will not go till the disk again however it will have lesser movement than C scan but again the jump can vary because I do not know where the next request is going to be. So this was a quick comparison between all the algorithms which you have let me know if you have any doubts I have given an extra table also for both the C scan and scan so that you can quickly compare those as well okay. These are the quick comparison tables you can go over them as well they contain the same data what we have learnt okay. Any doubt at this point any doubt please go through whatever we have discussed this was all about disk scheduling algorithms and the next topic we will move on to is the modern way of storing data. I hope you all are able to observe that the hard disk drive which we are working on right now is requiring a lot of mechanical parts it needs a spinning disk which has the tracks it needs a moving head so far the HDD the physical movement matters a lot if the head moves too much the axis becomes slow okay. And that is why we have so many algorithms right but is it actually used in current systems no it is not it is not used anymore rather we have something known as SSDs right you must have heard about SSDs yeah okay if you are good with the algorithms shall we move on to the modern ways of storage okay. So this is what we are looking at hard disk drive is what we discuss see this is the moving disk this is the spindle which is going to move okay and then track everything and as you see this something known as SATA so SATA was like a protocol which was helping you connect power and actually move the spindle on the disk that you have okay. Now what we have right now is going to be a SSD okay or even though apart from SSD we have something known as NVMe we will discuss about this also okay this is even faster than SSD the current systems that we use are going to use NMB okay. Let us talk about SSD first so in you see if you see an SSD is there any moving head at the moment no okay it is a solid state drive and this is going to store data using something known as flash memory now what is flash memory it is a type of storage that can be I can say it can keep data or even after the power has been turned off and how does that happen SSDs if you think you can relate with pen drives or memory cards or mobile phones which you must have seen right now we have a lot of cloud storage and everything but before people used to have memory cards or the pen drives as well okay. So flash memory that you have is non-volatile memory and it is used for fast storage so SSD does not suffer from all the mechanical head moment is that clear? So but if right now if I don't have mechanical head moment how I am even accessing anything how is data being accessed from the disk block so what happens here the different connectors and controllers which you have see this controller and these all connectors again the details of it is not very important I am just showing you so that I can see how the SSD looks like so what the controllers does they send electrical signals okay. So the flash memory cell there will be accessed by this particular electrical signal and then data is written or read now you all know that your data always work in binary 0 1 it is nothing but as signal nothing else okay. So based on that it is going to write the data so what happens when OS is going to request something the SSD controller that you have is going to move to the nand flash chip okay. That is actually you have discussed about flip flops yes or no you know what are flip flops no okay. Do you know what is and you must have read about nand as well flip not flip flop you must have read book connectors instead in discrete mathematics yes or no you were supposed to draw some circuits they were gates right this was a AND gate and AND gate would be this one not of AND so these gates that you have these are known as logic gates these logic gates are connected to forms circuits and flip flops okay flip flops are nothing but they are electronic devices which help you transfer data from one place to another again this is some extra information is not required to study okay just some basic information so when SSD controller is going to pass a signal the nand flash chip will get into acceleration and then it will access the memory cells electronically and then it is going to write the data if you must have seen in the gate what happens you provide some input and based on that input you get some output so what is happening to this output this output is what is getting written into the disk blocks okay does that make sense okay now and you all know that because right now I am not having mechanical moments rather I have electronic moments with the help of these gates and flip flops and that is the reason SSDs are super fast okay and they can even have random access because you just have to reach the location and by changing the input of the flip flop or the gate you can easily go to any location you want to whereas in the mechanical moment you have to physically traverse through every single request right is that clear everyone any doubt okay just suppose always tells you that read the disk block 100 so what will happen at the moment the SSD controller checks the internal mapping okay and the internal mapping suppose say it is stored in a flash page x that will literally go to that flash page okay any doubt at the point any doubt think about it so I can say SSD is much faster than the hard disk drive because of no mechanical moment but see in HDD what were we comparing total seek time total moments similarly to have performance limitations in SSD we are going to talk about latency throughput okay what is the internal parallelism how many requests can you serve at the moment okay and you all know because it is working on gates you can only serve a number of requests at the moment okay like gates only give you one output okay so how to connect everything and give you the output okay any doubt at this point we will discuss about the limitations of SSD based on the other data as well as of now is a difference between HDD and SSD clear any doubt in the exam you won't be asked about the actual mechanical parts but how their function can be asked okay moving on to NVME okay NVME is non-volatile memory express but it is still a solid state drive only okay the important part over here is that like SSD was a completely different physical memory okay NVME is not completely different rather it is going to be a protocol that you follow okay see right now here you follow SATA SATA is also an interface okay we are not concerned about what the SATA is just think about it that like if you have multiple roads okay on in the express way you have multiple lanes right in normal road you have us like one way only okay so SATA is like a one way connection it has only one road running whereas NV is going to have parallel lanes for data to be processed first bench please stop talking if you want to discuss discuss softly okay so here you see again because NV is going to have multiple parallel lines for data to be accessed clearly it is going to be much faster okay so modern high performance SSDs are going to use NVME this is a protocol and this is much better than the SATA which we were using earlier okay and this is specially designed for flash type storage okay where data is stored with the help of electrical signals and it is non-volatile in nature okay any doubt okay again what will decide the performance of this chip low latency how much operations are you performing at the moment how many parallel cues of data access do you have okay and then we will discuss something which is cute depth also okay but as of now I hope it is clear this is the very ancient technology which we were using now we work on NM okay NVM sorry okay and this is nothing but a protocol applied on the SSD okay and this is available for parallel IO request any doubt at the moment any doubt think about it and tell me if you have any concerns then we will move on to the different criteria that you have okay a quick comparison has also been given you can check it out later so if you think about it HDD is saying how do I reduce the head moment to service a request whereas SSD and NVM is saying how do I manage multiple IO request efficiently okay now we will move on to the parameters which SSD and NVM are going to look at okay so it is not about head moment but it is about latency now how long one IO request take to finish okay because suppose an app has read this file block SSD returns data after two seconds okay this delay is latency so latency is the waiting time of serving one request lower latency will mean faster response overall then you are going to look at throughput throughput is how much data has been transferred per second okay so good for large file copy okay video processing backups throughput is all about total data transfer per second you should improve the throughput so that the larger files are transferred in lesser amount of time okay next is IOPS IOPS is like how many input output operations are you servicing per second it tells how many read write the ques the device can complete in one second okay now it is very important for things like a database right so many random read and write can happen database okay so IOPS is going to count the number of operations not the size of data okay then we have q depth now q depth is very important because q depth tells you how many IO requests are either waiting in the queue to be serviced or are at progress in parallel okay because the more is the number of parallel I can say queues or the more parallel processes I am going to say the better is the access time of NMD okay so higher q depth can improve performance because device can then work on multiple requests whatever is coming along but if you have too much of q depth you can say the waiting time will also become larger and larger okay so q depth is pretty much a trade off as you can see more requests can improve throughput but too many requests will increase latency because everybody is going to be waiting okay any doubt in this there is also something known as batching batching says that how many requests I am able to combine together and do the performance okay like I can say if I am reading block 100 okay if I am reading block 100 reading block 101 reading block 102 so instead of thinking of these requests as single requests what your flash drive should do that you should combine everything together and then handle it as a batch so if I am handling this per request as a batch I can say overhead will be improved and hence throughput will be improved because you can access one single block of memory at one time this is also going to ensure that there is fairness in the system okay not one process is not taking up the entire storage okay any other doubt and again pathelism will come along the way we have already talked about it how the q depth ensures that multiple people are progressing multiple requests are processing and that is basically parallelism and specially your this non-volatile memory is meant for parallel work they can handle multiple requests maintain multiple queues have internal flash chips which keep on doing okay any doubt at this moment any question just go through this once and let me know if you have any doubt want to compare the performance in this simulator you have to go to stay the storage performance lab and choose a device whichever you want to check give it a couple of requests give the request size and increase or decrease the q depth to see how many requests are being processed and then you can recapitulate it accordingly and it will show you how much time it is taking to perform a particular request okay this is just for an example it won't be asked an exam it is just for your reference to see how the latency is improving based on the different different storage devices that you have any doubt at this point you can also see page caching over here page caching is something that we discussed in the previous class okay see how it is going to be a miss or it just wanted to show you this quickly suppose I am not reading the file at the moment and I go ahead read file A to see how the application went to the page cache in the page cache the data was not available it was available in the storage I will just show you again see again if I read file I will go to the application application will search in the page cache as of now it is not available it will go to the storage pick data and bring it back to the page cache okay see what has happened here first the read is missed then you see the file has been moved to the page cache now when you read file A again now you see because the file is available in the page cache it is not moving to the disk rather it is simply picking up data from the page cache that you have okay next if I go ahead read file B read file B again it was not in the page cache earlier it has been picked up from the disk and move to page cache and that is why file B is available now the second time again I write file B or read file B I will be picking up from the page cache the operation is going to be much faster okay you can try out multiple combinations over here any doubt in this we have discussed this in detail in the previous class just wanted to show you how it works in real life as well okay next thing is write and F sync again if you notice we have done this already how write is going to write in the page cache or the OS buffer not in the disk any issue as of now any questions any questions we have one more thing which is known as async IO but it is not very important okay async IO and blocking IO are two things which you can read about I'll just give you a very small brief about it and then we are done with the class before the IO says that while an application was running an IO request has come as IO request has come the current operation will be waiting okay you can see it is blocked at the moment okay whereas async will say that the thread or the process whatever is running will keep running and the IO which has come in will also be processed in the background so both are working in parallel this is async IO not very important but sometimes it is asked in the interviews to address what is blocking IO or what is async IO so take your time go through it and let me know if you have any concerns this is something which is more important for databases as compared to this okay again go through this and let me know if you have any questions I'll resolve that that depends that depends that is your processes still available are there any other requests waiting so depending on what the current situation is it will be approved and not every IO is that important or you need to stop and address or it is not a very important to let the process go on while your IO is going on so depending on what the request type it will keep on changing you can go through buffered IO and direct IO also it is exactly what we have discussed in the right and fs pretty much the same thing it is used in databases okay so you might get a question what is double caching double caching is maintained when databases are also maintaining their cache and your system is also maintaining a cache that is known as double caching okay simple theoretical concepts let me know if you have any concerns over here