you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you designing the schema for Netflix. Today we are going to complete that schema discussion. We are going to complete the design on Netflix. Now in the last session what we did was we started from the different workflows, the first one being the account access, right. The first one being account access, we looked at all of the activities that happens inside the account access which is account creation, credential storage, profile, authentication. Then we talked about the shared viewing behavior meaning multiple profiles in the same account which will separate the recommendation, watch history and personalization. Then we talked about the subscription lifecycle where a user can purchase, renew, upgrade, downgrade, cancel, expire its purchase, off a subscription. Then we talked about the payment lifecycle where the user can perform a payment transaction as attempted. Success, it can lead to a success or failure. We might need to refund some payments, payments needs to be tracked historically for audit tracking and plan can be updated. Then we talked about the content consumption part where a user can select a content, stream starts, device used, we have to capture progress tracking for content, we have to capture the entirety of the duration, we have to capture languages, we have to capture watch duration, we have to capture and switch stream quality, we have to capture. Then we talked about the episodic viewing where we saw that on top we are going to have a title, title can be of different types, title can be of a type of movie or a series. If it is a series then it will have a series sub table which is going to have different seasons. Again there is no need to create a specific series table for series, you can just add a content type attribute in the title section. If it is a series series is going to have multiple seasons and seasons is going to have multiple episodes but the title can also have special or bonus episodes. So what we discussed here was that there is a very clear hierarchy, season releases, episode and release schedule we have to capture. Then we talked about the discovery and the recommendations, yes I am not sure at the screen let me do that. Then we talked about the discovery and the recommendation section where we talked about how can a user discovered different content which is based on a search, based on a filter on category, filter on language, filter on caste, trending content, recommendation and user feedback. Then we talked about regional availability because the content is available for different region. So regional availability need not be a separate workflow altogether what you can actually do is you can actually track regional availability at the time when the content is being listed itself. So for a regional availability we need to track the licensing, what is the duration of the licensing from when to where the license is, country restrictions, reason wise content visibility, future expansion we have to keep in mind and we also need to track our subscription plans on the basis of the region and at the end device switching which is required for session tracking. Then what we did was we simply just categorized this into clear categories all of these actions that we have discussed here we have categorized it into clear categories and we were working on preparing an exhaustive list of core entities. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if we are good to start with creating the list of entities and attributes. Everybody a thumbs up in the chat that is great. Now we started with account user account. So now I am going to add the entity and the attribute list together we are going to have a discussion on that together. So the first entity is the account entity. What do I need to store for the account entity everyone? First of all every account will have its own unique account ID which is going to be used internally and which will add as the primary key for this particular table. Then the account will have extremely sorry. I am going to have the account name. Now for an account creation I need the email. I need the phone number. For the account creation I need a password but generally we don't store the password directly. We hash the password and we store the password hash in the table. The country or the region in which the user belongs to account belongs to and the timestamp at which the account is created. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if the account entity makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Yes. Then everyone the second entity that we talked about was the Profiles entity. Again in which I am going to have a profile ID to uniquely identify a profile in the system which will be my primary key. Now a profile is created for a user account. So here I am going to have the user ID which is going to be my foreign key that refers to the account ID sorry. Which will refer to the foreign key in the accounts table. Then each profile can have its own name. So profile name. Then along with the profile name everyone what else I need here is. There was a section where it was clearly mentioned that age restriction needs to be there for the profile section. So we are going to cater to the age group for which this profile is created. And finally what else do I need for a profile everyone? I need personalized recommendations for a profile. Is it good to store all the recommendations for a profile in the profile table itself? Everybody present in the session yes or no? Yes or no? No. But the database mentions that a profile will have a preferred language. One preferred language right that is something that I can just store here. Again if the document mentioned that there can be multiple preferred languages that a user can have a user profile can have then we would not store the preferred language in this table as well. Simply the reason being we do not want any multi-valued attribute in the tables in the entities. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you presenting the session? Super. Then everyone the third entity that we were talking about was the subscription plans entity right. Again to identify it uniquely I am going to have a plan id which is going to be my primary key right account id sorry not account id my bad plan name. Now what else are the attributes that you would want to store for a subscription plan based on the document shared everyone? Expiring data does would it make more sense to store the planned duration in the table? I mean this is a subscription plan this is the interface sorry this is the template this is not a user subscription for a plan for that we are going to have a different table right. So yes planned duration is something that we can store absolutely correct. What else everyone? Price. What else everyone? Number of devices very good. What else viewing quality right. So let us call it plan quality and maximum streams. Maximum streams. Anything else that we need to store for a subscription plan everyone. Anything else that we need to store for a subscription plan country. So now my question to all of you present in the session is in the given document are we asked about country or region? Region. Can a region of multiple countries? Can plans basically be according to southeast Asia or now tell me what makes more sense? Does it make more sense to have plans according to country or plans according to region? Region but when I talk about content availability will content availability be an attribute or be a property that I would want on the basis of the region or the country. Region please raise your hands country why licensing and laws. What about the plans? Will I not have the same problem in the plans pricing and taxation? Yes. So it is best to have plans present for country or what is even better is that you don't include any information about the country in this particular table. You create that mapping completely separately in a different table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes ends to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Why am I saying that? The reason why I am saying that is because is it possible that I am using the same plan across multiple countries multiple regions? Yes or no? Is it given to you in the document that the plan will differ region-wise? Anywhere in the document is it mentioned that the plan will differ region-wise? No, but it can. We don't have that functionality right now but we need that functionality. We are going to have a separate table for that. Again if you want you can add that in the same table as well it is not wrong to do that. The only reason why I am not doing that is because of the possibility that what if the same plan needs to be used across multiple countries or multiple regions? Everybody a thumbs up if this design choice makes ends to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? We had a choice here. We could have chosen to add the region here itself but according to me what I think is because this is an ambiguity. We might need to store. We might need to store or use the same plan for multiple regions, multiple countries. So I am not going to include the region here. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes ends to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? That's great. The next table, the next entity that I have is the individual subscriptions that user are going to have. So here again to uniquely identify a subscription, I am going to have the subscription ID which is going to be my primary key. Then I am going to have the account ID, the user which is purchasing a subscription which is going to be my foreign key referring to the account ID in the account stable. I am going to have my plan ID which plan the user is subscribing to again my foreign key. What else do I need? Expire. Along with expire before expire do I need to start date? Absolutely correct. Start date. End date. And then my question to all of you present in the session will be will all the subscriptions present in the subscriptions table be active at any point of time? Do I only need to store the list of the active subscriptions that were purchased by a user or the subscriptions which are active for a user right now? Yes or no? Everyone yes or no? I want everyone to give me a thumbs up or thumbs down in chat. Whether I only need to create a list of the active subscriptions. The finance team complete the into customer purchases and payment activity putting an auditing purposes which means we just don't want the active plans. We want any plan ever purchased by the user to be a part of the list. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session which means I would need to have one more attribute present in this which is going to be called as status. But now everyone think about this and tell me can the plans also change yes or no? Can the plans also change? Today I am offering different plans tomorrow I want to change the plans. Now possibility number one is that there might be an update in the plan that we have to offer which is something that we will be able to support. But is it possible that we might discontinue a plan completely from the platform? Is it a possibility or not? Yes can I remove those plans that I discontinue from the subscription plans table? Yes or no? Think about it. Can I remove them? If I have a plan ID present in the subscription table which is a foreign key can I remove a plan without removing this entry? No do I have to remove this entry? Can I remove this entry from the subscription table? No because I want a complete historical visibility which means I cannot remove the plans as well. So I am just going to add a status here as well. Now here everyone these status will always be enums. Everybody we understand what an enum is? Everybody can you give me a thumbs up in the chat if it's clear to all of you what an enum is? Enum is basically a string object which can only contain a thick set of defined values because we only want the status to be what we define in the system. Right? Super. Now what was the next workflow that we discussed in the last lecture? Payments. So the next entity that we are going to create is the payments entity. What will be present in the payments table? Payment ID which is going to be my primary key. Subscription ID for which subscription you are making this payment, your foreign key, date of the payment, amount of the payment. Now because the payment can be successful or failed payment status. Right? Payment method and in some cases the payments can be refunded as well. So a refund status. Everybody a thumbs up if there's anything else that we need to incorporate into the payments table. Please feel free to give me a thumbs up or a thumbs down. If there's anything more that you would want to add to the payments table please let me know. I'll be happy to discuss that. Sorry? Someone was saying something. Sorry? Because these two are completely different entities. Right? And subscription can have multiple entries. Now again I'm actually eventually going to come to the discussion on the subscription part as well again. So we will come onto the discussion again but payment date is an attribute of a payment that is made again. Now date basically talks about the timestamp as well. The exact timestamp at which the payment was made. There can be a difference between when the payment was made and when the subscription became active. It can be in seconds or minutes but there can be a difference. Right? So to make sure that you have a complete visibility about the payment for your financial history that is the reason why because that is the time where the money will be credited into my account as well. So it is just an attribute to track your payment. Again date can be replaced with timestamp which is the better attribute. Can I fetch the user ID with the subscription ID from the subscription table? So it is up to you if you want to store that or not. You can add that here or you can join in fetch that completely update. Again we can add that here definitely not an issue. Good suggestion. It is we are missing no great. Now what was the next workflow of the payments? Okay content. So what was the structure that we discussed for the content? On the top we are going to have the title in which again title ID to uniquely identify the title. It is going to be my primary key. Title name. Title type whether it is a movie or a series or we can add more attributes to this enum. When my platform is going to support more content, different type of content. So this is going to be an enum. What else? Description. What else? Releasier. What else? Sorry? Where is the title? Region. Now can it title be available across multiple regions? Can one movie be available across multiple regions? So would you want to store regional availability in this table? It will become a multi-valued attribute to we need that. Will we be able to filter the content on the basis of the region if I create a multi-valued attribute which is region? So we are going to add region definitely good suggestion but we are going to add a separate table for that. What else? So duration will that go in the title because title can be of movie and TV series. So if it, but so if let's say this title type is a TV series. How will you add the duration of a TV series in the title? Number of episodes but that will depend on the number of seasons. So you are thinking from the perspective of how it is going to look on the screen which is an information that we can fetch from multiple tables. It does not have to come eventually from the same table right but by design that is not a property of a title. Title will only contain the common properties of all the different types of content that we would want to list on the platform. Language. Single-valued attribute or multi-valued attribute. Single-valued or multi-valued? Multi-valued. Would I want to store that here? Is a filtering required on the basis of language? Filtering of content required on the basis of the language? Yes. If multi-valued attribute will I be able to perform the filtering properly? Yes or no? No. So we are going to add language but in a separate table. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Super. Now what else? Ratings. Now rating is again a discussion of how we want to store the rating. So tell me the moment you go and click a file or a title on Netflix or Prime. Are you able to see the rating of that? Yes or no? Yes or no? Yes. Do we have the feature to be able to filter or do we want a feature to be able to filter or recommend the content on the basis of the rating? Yes. So every single time a user opens his or her profile, the recommendation engine will look for the user rating onto any particular content. Now individual ratings we are going to store separately. For sure individual ratings we are going to store separately but a cumulative rating for each and every title has to be present in the table for us to be able to filter or recommend a content on the basis of its rating. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this is making sense to all of you present in the session? Great. Now what else? Release date. Again, ideally we should have the release date because if you just want to display the year it can simply be fetched from the date. Yes. So the problem is we also have series in which each season will be released in a different year. Then we have episode each episode is going to have its own release date. So to incorporate that, yes we are going to add dates in the sub-table as well but this is the overall date when the first draft was released. Next table everyone. All right. Now, even here before we move ahead, right, let us evaluate what we have created. So far, let us have a look at the discussions again. Just give it two minutes. I think about the tables that I have created exhaustively again, right. If I think about the table that I have created exhaustively again, if I start from the user's table, right. In the user's table, I have the account ID, account name, right, email which is supposed to be again a unique attribute, phone number which is supposed to be a unique attribute, right. Password hash created at blah blah blah country region. Then if I talk about the profile, I have the profile ID, the account ID, the profile name, the age group, right. So, the password language, grid, is there a requirement of us to keep track of when a profile was created in the profile as well? Will that be a good thing to have everyone? Yes or no? Can we store that? Yes or no? Yes, let us add that created at. Then everyone, now because I need a support of different regions, right, before I move on to subscriptions and payments and everything, let us talk about the regions as well. So, the fourth table that I am going to create will basically be to map different regions, right. Let us call it the regions table, in which what I am going to have? I am going to have the region ID to uniquely map a region, primary key. I am going to have my country name, right. Country code if you want, but that is not required. Anything else that we would want to store for a particular region in the table everyone? Now again, that is a design choice, okay. So, that is a design choice meaning do you want to call a country as a region or do you want to include multiple countries in a region, okay. That is completely a design choice and a business decision. Now, because eventually if I think about it exhaustively, right, a lot of the things that I need eventually depend on the country. So, why not make a country as a region itself? Is that a smart business decision everyone? Yes or no? That is the reason why I am doing that. Otherwise, if there is a business requirement that one region can have multiple countries, then I am going to have a region ID, region name for example, South East Asia, whatever it is. I am going to have a country that is going to have a region ID that is going to go as a foreign key to the primary key of the region table. Make sense? Take care. Now, did I have my subscription table? Table number 5 or let me make this the table number 5. Can we add language? In the language is something that depends on the user, right, because a person who is staying in the US might want to watch a content in Hindi. A person staying in India might want to watch a content in English, right. So, language is not be a regional attribute, it will be a user driven attribute or a profile level attribute where we have already incorporated that into the profile language reference, right. Super. Now, everyone, now let us talk about the individual subscriptions, right. Or before that, let us talk about the subscription plan table. In the subscription plan table, I have an unanswered question which is the status. What can be the different value of the status? Can I say to think of it, I can only have two values in my mind as of now whether a subscription is whether a subscription plan is active or inactive. Can everybody give me a thumbs up with this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no. Do I need to add any other value in this enum? No, great. Now, let us come to the subscriptions table. So my question to all of you present in the session is, will a user only subscribe to a plan once? Will a user only subscribe to a plan once, right. So, a user will make a payment for a subscription today. That day when the subscription expires, user is going to make the same payment again and I need to track that separately. Can everybody give me a yes first of all of this makes sense to all of you present in the session. At the same time, the user can also choose to upgrade its subscription, downgrade its subscription, cancel its subscription, right. Subscription can expire. So my question to all of you present in the session is that how do you suppose or how do you plan to note down the action that the user is going to take to go from one subscription to the other subscription. Meaning, meaning if a user is upgrading or downgrading a subscription, will you fetch all the subscriptions for the user and then you are going to eventually see that whether the previous plan was a lower grade plan is compared to the current plan and then I am going to decide whether a user has upgraded or downgraded. So that is also an activity that I need to track. Everybody thumbs up with this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, for that what I am going to do is I am just going to add another enum here which is action type, right. Now what can be the possible action type that a user can perform everyone? A user can purchase, renew, upgrade, downgrade or cancel. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. The subscription table is exhaustive enough now. Very good. So, let us see the first plan the user purchases. In that case the action type will be purchase, okay. But now what the user wants to do is in an expo the user wants to upgrade its plan. So for the next entry that we are going to have the action type will be upgrade that this subscription plan was purchased by the user by upgrading from a previous purchase plan. This was not a new purchase made by the user, make sense. So what was the intent behind subscribing to a plan is what we are trying to capture with this attribute, great. Stator is now a redundant attribute. So you can remove that actually. But status is basically something that you can still use to capture your active plans, right. Active subscriptions. So what we are doing is we are tracking purchased, renewed, upgrade, downgrade or canceled. But we do not know which of these subscriptions are currently active, right. So that is what will be tracked in the status. That we can add but that is something that will again extend the scope of our discussion. So that is why I am not going into that because it is not a business requirement as of now as well. But yes we can definitely add that. We will again have to stop 10 minutes think about how to implement auto pay, right. The reason I am not going into that discussion is because I want to exhaustively complete what we have, which again is a very big requirement given to us, right. We are eventually going to have 20, 25 attributes here itself. Make sense? Super. Now everyone, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then comes the title part, then comes the content hierarchy, right. So in the content hierarchy on the top I have the title, in which I have the title title type is an enum. What are the possible values that my title type can have? So now it depends on what is the way that you want the system to be implemented, right. I want each and every displayable content to be called as a title, right. So either what you can have is you can have just two titles present here, which is movie and series or what you can have is even each of these subcategories you can include as a title meaning even for a season you are going to create a title because generally if you see when we search for any particular TV series, for example, if I search for suits, the seasons are listed separately as well in the search. So do you want the seasons to be also recommended as a title that is completely a design decision that you can take here, right. So what I am going to have is I am just going to have movie and series as my title, okay. You can have seasons as well, totally up to you. One question that I would want to ask all of you present here is, I take you know episodic search, we might need or we might not need. Okay, design decision. Then I am going to have a table which will be my movie table. So I am not going to give separate numbers to this because this is basically a part of the hierarchy, but ideally it will be counted as a separate attribute in which I am going to have the movie ID. Do I need to capture the name of the movie again? Is there a requirement of capturing the name of the movie again? Will the movie name differ from the title name in case of a movie? No. Do I need to keep track of the duration again? No. What do I need to keep track of? Sorry. Cast. Again, can it be a multi-valued attribute? Can it be a single-valued attribute or a multi-valued attribute? Multi-valued? Will I store that in the table here? Yes or no? No. I will create a separate table for that. So here I am right now not sure of what are the individual attributes that I want to store for a movie. I am just going to leave it as it is. Basically I will eventually discuss whether there is a need for this table or not. Right? Deuration was not covered. Absolutely correct. So I am going to add duration here. Anything else you are able to think of? Which is going to be an attribute specific for a movie everyone? Reviews we have captured again will there be one review? Many. How will we store the reviews separately? Right? Anything else? No. Take it. Now next is a series. So what will be the attributes of a series? Series ID? What else? Anything else you are able to think of which is going to be an attribute for a movie series? Sorry. Number of seasons is that pre-decided at the time when a series is created? Is that an attribute that should always be present? We can have. Right? We can have released season count. But is there an attribute that you necessarily need to be present in this table? Yes or no? No. Do we ever display the count of seasons for any particular series? No. Right? What I can actually store is? What I can actually store is? The series status here which is whether the series is already complete or there are more additions to come for this particular series. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. Then I have the episodes table. What do I have in the episodes table? Episode ID? Oh sorry, seasons. Right? What will be there in the seasons? Season ID? Do the seasons usually have a season name as well? I have seen a season name associated with the TV series. Generally I have not. It can be depending on whether I want to support that or not. I will choose to have or not have that attribute here. What else? A season belongs to a series. So, series ID. What else everyone? Anything else that we need to capture for a season? Sorry? Status which is active or not, completed or not, we can track that. Anything else which is critical for me to track? Sorry? Number of episodes, again something I can fetch from the episodes table. Do you show that? You do not. You just show a list of all the episodes. So, you will have to fetch all the episodes. What do I have to specifically add here? Season number. If you are just going to track, this is the seasons. How do you know which is the first season, second season, third season, fourth season? So, what we also need to track is the season number. Here, this is my primary key. This is my primary key. Now, there is one thing that we have missed in the movie and the series table. Can you tell me what have we missed in the movie and the series table? Can you tell me what we have missed in the movie and the series table, everyone? Absolutely correct. A movie or a series belongs to a title. If you do not add that, how do you know which title it belongs to? So, you are going to have a title and you are going to have a title ID in the series table as well. Okay. This is going to be my primary key for the season and this is going to be my foreign key referencing to the series table. Now, the last table in the content is your episodes. Sorry, not the last table we have more. In which you are going to have the episode ID, your primary key, then you are going to have your season ID which is going to be your foreign key, then you are going to have the same episode number, then you are going to have the episodes have their own titles, episode name or episode title, each episode has its own duration and each episode can have its own release date. Sorry, description also we can add. Everybody, a thumbs up if the episode table also makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Yes and the last attribute in the content hierarchy is the special content. Now, the special content is not a part of a season, special content is directly going to come under your title hierarchy. So, what I am going to have here is, I am going to have the special content ID name type because there are different types of special content given to us, duration, description and the title ID it belongs to. Which is, this is going to be my primary key, this is going to be my foreign key. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Sorry, we can add a release here. Again, your question, why not a date? Can you tell me why not a date? Well, we can add, again there can be a conflict of seasons releasing in two years and from December to January. So, it is a choice whether you want to add that attribute or a property for a season or not, but ideally we should basically to mark the start of when the season was released. So, release date to capture the release of the first edition of this particular series, if it was released episodically, otherwise if it was released all together, then just like this. Now, my question to all of you present in the session is, does this hierarchy support episodic releases or yes or no? Will I be able to implement a logic for episodic support using this hierarchy? Yes or no everyone? Yes. Now, in the future, if I want to schedule a release as well, I will just be able to make a few changes to the episode table and I will be able to release or schedule the releases for the new episodes as well based on some minute changes, right? Great. Now, because we have already talked about the content, right? Now, let us also talk about the language and the genre or the category support for this content, right? So, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, now table number 13. First of all, what I need to make sure is to capture all the possible category or genres that I have on the platform, right? So, I am going to have a category table in which I am going to have the category ID and the category name. And then, I am going to have a content category table in which I am going to have the content ID and the category ID captured here, for which the primary key will be a combination of the content ID and the category ID. So, here the reason is because the relationship between a content and category is many to many. This is basically a junction table to capture that relationship. Can everybody give me a yes or this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. That is great. Then, another filtering requirement is on the basis of the cast or the creator. So, here what I am going to have is I will have to create a new table where I will be able to store all the people involved in the cast or creation. So, here let us say I create a person table in which I am going to have the person ID. I am going to have the person name. You can add any number of metadata that you want. I am not doing that because I do not need to support that. For example, the age description, any of the other attributes you want to add here. But one thing very important is the role. Whether this person is an actor or a director or a producer. But now, I would like to ask you a question which is can the same person act as an actor director producer as well? Have you seen instances of those yes or no? Yes. So, does it make sense to implement the table like this? Does it make sense to implement the role at the role part for that person here? No, he right. Because the same person can have multiple roles. Now, my question to all of you will be does it make sense to capture the multiple roles that a person can have separately in a table? Every when the yes or no? That whether let us say Anurag Kashyap is a director actor and producer. Anurag Kashyap director and Anurag Kashyap producer and Anurag Kashyap actor. Should I capture that in a separate table person roles? How many of you think we should do that? Can you please raise your hands? How many of you think we should not do that? Can you please raise your hands? Can you tell me why we should not do that? Category? I have a number of people or the actors or actors. So, you are saying we should further segregate this into multiple tables. We can do that. That is one way to do that. But any other way any other design in which we can do that. So, absolutely correct. One smart choice is to make sure that you create a proper categorization of actor, directors and producers. Meaning, cast and creators will be completely different. Again, in cast and creator as well, there will be a clear categorization on what are the different types of roles that a person can support. But when I talk about creator, do I only have the actor and director and producer? If you look at the movie credits, how many different type of contributions are present for a movie every month? And can I say, usually we try to capture as many as possible in that? So, the roles can be many. Does it make sense to create a table for each and every one of those roles? No. Now, tell me, will a role in which a person is involved be linked to the title that he or she has participated in? Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. So, can I do one thing? Can I create a contribution table in which I am going to have contribution ID, content or title ID? Then, person ID and then role to capture in what capacity this person has contributed to this particular title. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present here, where the role can be actor, director, creator, producer, writer, camera man, spot boy, any sort of role that you want to support, you can add that as an enum here. Yes, that is great. Now, I would like to add the language support. How we can add that? As I said, any sort of metadata that you want, you can add that. Any sort of metadata that you want to capture, you can add that age, height, weight, previous movies, anything you want you can capture. I am only capturing the ones that are required based on the document shared with us. Now, the next is the support for a language. So, first of all, what I need is I need a language table. And then I need a content language table. Now, I want all of you to go back to the document. And when I talk about the regional expansion, in the regional expansion, you can see that the platform is preparing to launch in multiple countries, not all content may be available in every region because of licensing extraction. Some content may support multiple subtitle option, multiple language options. So, can I see here, content language mapping should be based on two different properties, which is first is subtitle in the second is audio. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Yes or no? Yes. So, first I am going to have title, audio language, in which I am going to have the title ID and the language ID, where a combination of title ID and language ID will be the primary key. And then I am going to have the title subtitle language. Again, I am going to have the title ID and the language ID. Combination is going to be my primary key. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if it is not making sense to anybody present here. Everybody a thumbs up if this is clear to all of you thumbs down if it is not making sense to anybody present in the session. That is great. Enough, there was a thumbs down at 1226 from your side. Any question that you have here? Come on, check it. Now, any other attribute, business item that we have missed capturing everyone? Any other important business item that we have missed capturing everyone? Any other type of analytics, any other type of support? We have added the support for region, we have added the support for language, we have added the support for streams and everything. Anything else that we have missed capturing? Anything else that we have missed capturing everyone? Sorry? A little bit more. Feedback, we have not captured, we are going to add feedback. What else? John or we have captured category same as John. Recommendations, all of these are analytics or recommendation engine. I am talking about business entities, business objects, any business object that we have forgot to capture? Again, not a business object, I am talking about a business object. Not a business object, required for recommendation engine, business object, very core thing we have missed. Streaming, again not a business object, an activity. A thing that the business cares about. Sorry? Money, money again, payment is there. Revease and feedbacks, we are going to capture that, don't worry. So, let me take you to one line. User access the platform for multiple devices and frequently switch devices while consuming the content. Different subscription offerings exist with variation in pricing, quantity, number of simultaneous streams and device support. Have we captured devices in any way everyone? Everybody present in the session? Yes or no? No, we have not captured the devices in any way. So, what are we going to do here? Is the next table that we are going to create, the table number 20, is going to be my device table. Device ID, account ID that is logged in on that particular device, device type and device name. There are more attributes that we generally store about that device which is the location from which it was logged in or the location from which it was last access. But we are not concerned about that as of now. Yes? device ID account ID, device type and device name, device ID being the primary key and account ID being the foreign key. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. Now, have we captured which subscription plan supports which devices? Have we captured that everyone? Yes or no? No. Subscription device support which is going to have the plan ID and what do we want to capture here everyone? Should I capture the device ID? Should I capture the device ID? Yes or no? No, what I should capture is the device type and a combination will be my primary key. Now, here everyone, my next question to all of you present in the session would be, do I need this separately or can this be a part of my subscription itself? Basically, when I am fetching a subscription plan whenever user logs in, will a user only have one active entry for a subscription plan everyone? Yes or no? Yes. I will need to fetch that any way to be able to check whether the user is subscribed or not and if it is subscribed to set the other attributes meaning maximum number of streams for streaming check I will need that for maximum viewing quality I am going to need that is why I will have to fetch that entirely. My question to all of you present in the session is, will there be any filtering that will be required on the basis of which plan supports what devices? Is that something that we have to capture? Is that something that is required? I do not see any requirement for that in the document right. I see a requirement of what content was consumed from what device? There we are going to create a separate table for the device right. When we are going to track the watch history, when we are going to track the sessions, we are going to separately capture the devices in a separate table. But for a subscription plan, the list of devices that is supported, do you need to have a separate table for this? Again a design choice. If you want, you can have that. I do not think this is required because I do not see a requirement of this. So, what I am going to do is, I am just going to go back a subscription plan and I am going to capture supported devices here. If you want, you can have a separate table. I do not see the need for that. So, I am okay with the non-atomic value being present in this particular table. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. A thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present. Yes, that is great. Now, here everyone I, yes. A single device has multiple account. We do not have that, right. Can you log into two different account on your Netflix? So, the idea is whenever user is logging into an account, right. Usually what you do is, when you log out, you remove that entry, right. For example, let us say how many of you have seen on your scalar dashboard, right. You have a restriction on the number of devices you can log in from. Correct. It is the sessions, the number of active logins that you have. Have you seen a login limit error sometimes on your scalar dashboard that you have to log out from your earlier devices to be able to log in? Now, when you log out, do you need to capture that you will log in in this particular device at that particular time? Was that required? I need to be able to track which device at any point of time, okay. Or the account at any point of time is logged in into which devices, okay. When I will need the tracking on the basis of device, do I need to know that, yeah, for this particular person, this particular device was used to watch the video or device, the type of the device that was used, type of the device. So, I don't need the individual device, idea of the device, name of the device, address to be captured in the viewing history, right. I don't need that. I only need that whether this content was consumed from a mobile or a laptop or a TV, anything like that. So, in the device table, let me show that table again. In the device table, right, I am only capturing those devices whether where a person is actively logged in, okay. The moment you log out, the entry from this table will be removed. The user is no longer logged in to that particular account. Make sense, okay. Super. Anything else, any other questions about this? Okay. Now, what we also miss this, we have captured the region, but we have not captured the regional availability for a content, right. So, the next table that I will create is the content availability table. In which I am going to have the content ID and the title ID and the region ID in which that title is available, the combination will be a primary key. Both of them individually will be a foreign key. Everybody, a thumbs up if this is also clear to all of you present in the session, yes or no. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Super. Now, let us talk about the feedback. So, feedback we are going to again need to think of very, very carefully, right. Because there can be multiple types of feedbacks that can be given by the people, right. Feedback can be given for the entire title, if it is a movie directly translates to that feedback. Feedback can be given for a season. Feedback can be given for an episode. Feedback can be given for the bonus content, right. And because we need to map a foreign key in the feedback table to the original key to identify the content on which the feedback is given, you will need to have separate feedback tables for capturing the feedback for each individual type of content being present on the platform or each entity present in the content hierarchy. Right now, I am just going to assume that we are only allowed to give the feedback on the entire title, because that is what we search for an individual episode when we go on the search. Or we do not recommend an individual episode as a recommendation. We recommend the entire series or an entire movie, right. So, here I am going to have a feedback ID, which is going to be my primary key. I am going to have a person ID that has provided the feedback or profile ID, sorry, not person. Then I am going to have the title ID again a foreign key. Then rating that is given, right. Then feedback text and then timestamp. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this much is sufficient to capture the feedback. Anything else that we need? Yes or no, everyone, anything else that we need? You, you. Now, it is given to us that the profiles that we have can also follow the artist or the creator present on the platform. Right. So, what I am going to do is 23 profiles followed in which I am going to have the profile ID, the person ID. And if we want, we can capture the timestamp at which this entry was created. Both of them, the combination will be my primary key. This will be a foreign key. This will be a foreign key. Everybody, a thumbs up if this relationship makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no, please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Great. Now, let us talk about the viewing behavior that we need to capture. Right. So, to capture the viewing behavior, what I will actually track is I will actually track a session. Right. Watch session basically captures at what time the user started watching a content. Right. So, what session ID profile ID, the device from which the user started watching. Again, instead of the device ID, what I am going to capture here is the device time. Not going to be a foreign key. Content ID or the title ID that I am capturing that I am watching. Episode ID. Watch start time, watch end time, watch duration, completion percentage, selected audio language, selected subtitle language and selected quality. Everybody present in the session can all of you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Now, what does this table supports? This table first of all supports the case where a user stops midway and wants to resume from the same time. I am capturing the completion percentage. So, continue later is supported here. Right. Here, each individual session is captured separately, which means if a user is rewatching a content again, I can query that on the basis of the title ID and the profile ID. How many time a given content has been consumed by a user? So, rewatch also it supports everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Device usage trend this support because we are capturing the start and the end time, it also captures the peak viewing hours that we want to add. It also supports the regional viewing behavior from the profile ID I can locate the subscription plan or the region where the account is located regional behavior can also be supported. Completion percentage can also be directly fetched. What is the completion percentage? Average completion percentage for that particular user. Language preferences for that particular user I can support from here. All the content watched by the user I can see how many times one particular language was picked. And again, using the selected audio language whenever there is a requirement of resuming any particular content, I can resume the content in the same selected language with the same subtitle with the same selected quality. Can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if the watch session table does not make sense to anybody. Now my question to all of you present in the session is does this table looks as scary as it sounded in the document. When we are actually capturing the session does it looks as scary as what it was looking in the document. A, B, C, A, B, C, A, this is what I want that is what I want. You simply need to track when a user is starting, when a user is ending and that's it. That's it. Now does this table also supports the watch history every when the yes or no. Everybody present in the session does this table also captures the watch history. Yes or no. Think about it. Now here one thing you have to understand that episode ID I have kept to be an attribute that can be null. Why because if I am consuming a movie I want the episode ID to be null. Super. Is episode ID and the title ID sufficient for me to fetch the season and the series? Yes or no? Yes. Episode ID can give me the season ID, season ID can give me the series ID, title ID I already have. Great. In case if the content is a movie then the ID can give me the movie ID in the details for that particular movie as well. So all of you are absolutely correct that this can support my watch history as well. But along with the watch history I also need to capture the search history. So this is table number 24 then I am going to have the table number 25. Search history which is going to have my search ID profile ID. Search ID profile ID, search text and the timestamp at which the search was made. Primary key for NK. What else do I need to capture? Sorry. Someone said something. What else do I need to capture? Let's go through the document again. Blah blah blah blah. Platform usage. We have supported profiles. We have supported personalized experience recommendation engine. We have supported right. Multiple devices. We have supported simultaneous streaming. We have supported subscription completely. We have supported visibility. We have supported most popular plans. We can find out renewal behavior. We can find out failed transaction. We can find out revenue trends across the regions. We can find out entertainment content. We have supported discovery and recommendations. We have supported search. We are supporting recommendations. We will talk about it. Trending list is what is missing. Category browsing we have language filters. I have cast clear to exploration. I have viewing behavior completion percentage language preference. Viewing consistency repeat watching behavior. I can capture. Great. This problem I don't have in the database now. Check it. Do we have this save content for later? Do we have a watch list supported as of now? Yes or no? Yes or no? No. So, take number 26. Will be the watch list or the saved content. In which I am going to have the profile ID, the title ID and the timestamp. Forn key, forn key combination will be a primary key. Revisit unfinished content. Have that feedback. I have that explore related content. Do I have that? Have I captured? How do I explore related content? Will related content only be on the basis of genre? So, ideally this is not something that you can store in the database. But it is finding. It can be the life. Will I capture that? It. Sir, attribute that you can. How many downloaded content links there in the past? calculated the Machines in the rearrium space Muhammad wall where M loved by plane at f king's condition sequence and Capital studies. starts to happen. Can I have another example of Kindergarten at the feeling and skilled director who am in the office, how could you react to this again. We now have already given this a think before. should come. Suppose 26 tables are in the IoT in the front Rocket Day. Insertiek FREM B in yourň Wol confidence is limited when you try Mid<|id|> this time should we continue understanding and my purpose offulness taking the this case study ideally if you will see other type of lectures on schema design major what you will see is a discussion around core entities almost already given out to the people in the case study. Major core entities are already in a way provided to you right. All of the attributes that you need to capture in a way are already provided to you. We did not had that. I did from a simple business requirement document we captured all of the business actions for each business action we performed the categorization and from the categorization we figured out the attributes that you would need to store. One last thing that we should take care of that we should take care of is a normalization analysis of the document or of the tables that we have prepared. So, here one by one we will quickly do a normalization analysis of all the tables that we have created. Let us start with the accounts table are all the values atomic everywhere. Max if you want you can break down your name into first name last name the choice it is not a multi-valued or it is not a present in the it is not a group entity present in the table. Now account ID is the primary key and all of the independent completely on the primary key. So, I do not even need to think of 2 NF this table for NF form the only place where there is a positive for 2 NF is where there is a composite candidate key meaning any non-prime attribute is partially dependent on the primary key. If there is only one attribute in the candidate key there is never even a possibility of that right 3 NF is any non-prime attribute transitively dependent on the primary key no all of them are directly dependent on the primary key or the candidate key. So, follows 3 NF B C NF any functional dependence see that we have in this it defines why this account ID email phone all three of my super keys. Everybody comes up with the accounts table makes sense to all of you present in the session. Similarly, when you look at the profile table right in the profile table this is my primary key this is the only candidate key it is present in 1 NF it is 10 to NF no composite key in 3 NF no transitive dependencies it is present in B C NF for every transitive dependency your deterministic is a part of the candidate key right. Subscription plans is this following 2 NF absolutely correct this thought in a 1 NF format but that is by choice is by choice I had a need to filter my on the basis of the devices supported and that is the need to make it an atomic value but up to you if you want you can make this table follow NF by extracting the devices into a table can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session super. Now everyone please have a look at the profile table again tell me from a future scope is the profile table present in 1 NF form or is the table following all the normal forms is there any attribute that future because of any change might make this table violate any age age group why will it violate a normal form age group is what I mean by when we create a profile on netflix up right we have a section to create a kids profile separately that is what basically the age group talks about right. So, that is a profile level attribute the attribute that I am talking about this preferred language right now my platform only has a sub for one preferred language but in the future it is a possibility that I might a user the able to just majority of the platforms right when we create a profile it asks to pick 3 of the favorite languages that we have so this is not a good design be a simple lattice or multiple . One NF all values are atomic yes 2 NF yes no composes 3 NF, no transitive dependency is great, 4 NF, BC NF, all candidate keys or all functional dependencies X is a super key S. Title, 1 NF, even all the attributes are the atomic, yes, 2 NF, what is the primary key only that is I D there is no other way to identity title right. So, no need for a 2 NF validation, 3 NF any transitive dependencies, no transitive dependencies right BC NF, all functional dependencies basically give you X being a super key, following the normal form same will go for movie, series, season, episode, special content and category. So, basically ideally if you will see right when we have created database itself at the same time we have been very careful about making sure that normalization concepts are being followed as much normalization as table in some places we have not in necessary normalization, which is fine. So, with that first of all that is it from my side in today's class thanks a lot everyone for being a part of this session right.