you you you you you you you you you you you you you what the group by clause, okay. What is the problem with the group by clause? So let us say if I ask you to solve this question, okay. Again let me just show you the database that we are going to be using again for today's session. We have already created that database in the last session. Now what are the different tables in the database? We have the employees table, we have the high performance table, we have the project employees. Let me just once again double check if this is the database that you are supposed to be using. Hmm, super. So I will just recall the database once. What you have is you have the employees table. In the employees table let us have a look at the employee table. Okay. So what you have in the employee table is the employee ID employee name department ID, ID, city, salary, experience, years, performance rating and joining rate. What other tables do we have? We have the department's table. Department ID department name, location and budget. Then we also have the project table in which, oh sorry. In the project table you have the project ID, the project name, the owning department ID, the project budget and the project status. Okay. And everyone we have one more table which is the project employees table. In which I have the employee ID, the project ID, the role on the project and the author. Okay. Everybody first of all the thumbs up is the database that we're using is making sense to all of you present in the session. You all have this database created with you. Yes, that's what we've used in the sequel lectures. Okay. Now can you write a query to give me this? Employee name employee salary and the department average salary of that employee. Okay. Okay. We have solved this question earlier as well. How have we solved this question earlier everyone? If you remember this is the question that we've already solved. This is the exact example that we discussed when we were talking about core related sub queries. Everybody first of all the thumbs up if you remember or not? Yes or no? Yes. So what was the query that we've written for this? Select employee name then salary. Then because we wanted the department salary, department average salary what we did was we used the sub query to get that right. So select E2 dot average of E2 dot salary from employees E2 where E2 dot department ID is equal to even dot department ID. Okay. This is this from employees E1 and this is the table that you are going to get. Why is this being printed like this? Oh, sorry. Let me use an alias for this. As department average salary. Okay. And this is what you get. Employee name salary and department average salary. But now if I evaluate the performance of this query what is going to happen in this particular query is because we know that the inner query or the sub query is dependent on the outer query. Can I say that the sub query is going to execute for every single row that we pass in the outer query. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. So this is a very inefficient approach. Why? Because for every record that you analyze in the outer query, the sub query is going to analyze all the records in the inner query. It is going to filter the departments on the basis of the condition that we have given using the warehouse and then it is going to compute the aggregate of all the filter rules. So this is a very, very poor SQL query in terms of performance. So what is the solution for that? Everyone how easy our life would have been if we would be able to do this select employee name salary average of salary from employees group by department ID. But why can we not write this? Why do we have a problem writing a query like this? What is wrong in this query everyone? What is not correct in this query? But if employee name will be a part of the group by then will the average salary function give us the correct average salary of the department then? So the problem is that you want the average salary of the department you want to partition the data on the department. But at the same time what you also want is you don't want to collapse the entire data for one department into one single record. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? And that is why that is what exactly the group by clause will do. What the group by clause will do is it will partition the entire data on the basis of the department ID and then eventually collapse all the rows for one department into one single record. What about? And give me your role number as well. Okay. Class can be a bit more difficult to say in the concept of a boardroom. Okay. So what I was saying was that group by will collapse everything into one single entry and we want to be able to compute the aggregate data on the basis of a filter. But we don't want to collapse those rows. We want the aggregate data to be present for every single record and that is what window function helps us in doing. The solution to this problem statement is using a window function. Now what will the window function do? The window functions. The window function performs calculation across related rows while preserving the original. The window function helps you to summarize related rows together, some the related rows together, average the related rows together. Any aggregate function it allows you to compute on the related rows together but it does not collapse the data onto one single record. It does not collapse. It does not collapse the data into one single record. What it does is it will display each and every row along with the aggregated data that we have computed. Where are you? Okay. Okay. So let me write or let us write our first window function query to try and understand how a window function works. Okay. Now let's read this query. Select employee name, department ID, salary, then this average that we have written, right? This is what our window function is. Sorry? Time? Q, late Q? What about the? Sorry? And yours? Where were you coming from? You were coming from the side and you were going to get out of the window, right? I was coming from the side. Why did you pick up the window? Why did you pick up the wrong side? It was a mistake. How much time did you write? How much time did you write? I write it as a hostel. I write it as a hostel. I write it as a hostel. I write the same room. I write it as a hostel. I write the same room. Where are you heading? You don't even have anywhere. You can give a pedal to the hotel. You shouldn't have gone out of the window because you didn't want to go out of the window. Make sure to come before 11-12 in the session. Make sure to come before when we start the content. Now coming back to the question, what is the query that we have written? Here is the query that we have written. Select employee name, department ID and salary. These are the three attributes that I want to print for every single record, every single employee from the employee stable. Then what I want is, I want to compute the average of the salary. This average is what the window function is. Most of you would be like, yeah, average is the aggregate function. How is the average the window function now? How many if you feel that? How does average becomes a window function? It becomes a window function when you use it with the over clause. So average needs to be computed over what data? Over your employees table, partitioned by the department ID, and returned that data as the department average salary. Let's see what the output of this query will be. And the output of this query is the exact same output that we have seen in the previous query. Everybody, first of all, can you give me a thumbs up? The first window function makes sense to all of you present in the session. A thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody. We will talk about each and every keyword that we've written in the query in a minute. Okay. Yes? Yes. That's what it is. Separately you are saying here? No. Separately, one thing that we've already seen is that aggregate functions and attributes cannot be combined together. That is something that we've already seen. Why we have seen that? Because aggregation works. We have seen the query execution order. Basically you cannot select employee ID, average of employee salary from employees. Correct? This will be an incorrect query. So that is what it means. The rules apply is the same. If you want to compute the average of the entire table, I'll talk about how we can do that. But it's not like you can separately use an aggregate function along with the same query. These attributes itself will not allow this. Make sense? Forget about window functions. Other attributes will not allow. Right? Super. Now, what are the major parts of a window function query? Step number one is to decide which window function we're going to be using. So there are different types of window functions. We're going to cover all of them. Average is one of those window functions. So here what I want to compute is average. Then the next keyword that we have is the over keyword. What is the over keyword? Over basically defines the window of the rows over which the window function needs to be computed. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? This is the keyword that is used to define that window. Okay? Now, inside the over function, there are two keywords that we can use. First is partition by that is used to create groups. Second is order by which is what we can use to sort the data. But brother, time. Then I also know it's late. I know it's late. Can you reply? Why were you late? You will be late in the session. You will be late in the session because I won't be saying anything. Then. No, but if you come from public transport, what time should you be leaving from the hostel? Even then it's late. Even then you're not one time. Make sure to come from the next session. Here, everyone, there are two clauses that can be used inside the over function. The first one is partition by and the second one is order by. We can use both of them as well. Partition by can also be used to partition the data on the basis of the department ID. And then we can also use order by clause to sort the data on the basis of any particular attribute. Let's have a look at an example for that as well. So here, everyone in the query that you've written, right? What I have is I have the employees present grouped by their department ID partition by the department ID. The salary and the average salary. But how are they arranged? They are not arranged in any particular order. I have Nihar, then I have Deir, there are current, then I have Rear. But I want to have a look at the data in one particular order, which order? I want to have a look at the data in the descending order of salaries. So partition by employee ID, order by salary in the descending order. And now what you have is for each partition, the employees are arranged in the descending order on the basis of their salaries. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session or thumbs down, if this does not make sense to anybody. Yes? So if you use order by the end, it is not going to partition your entire or one group, one partition in the descending order. It is going to partition the entire output in the descending order, right? What I wanted here was that employees from one department still grouped together, partitioned together, but arranged in the order of the salary in the descending order. That is why we define the order by clause in the over function. Make sense? Super. So everybody, first of all, a thumbs up if how a window function query is written makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Yes? Super. Now let us try to solve a couple of other questions and let us try to understand the different types of windowcodes. So what are the different types of window functions? The different types of window functions are first one being your aggregate window functions. One example for which we have seen here, which is your average aggregate function, same way all of the aggregate functions your min, max, sum and count can also be used as window functions. Can everybody give me a yes? If this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Yes? Super. So even the next question that I have for you is before we move on to the other types of window functions, I want all of you to try to solve this question, which is for each employee, print the employee name, the department name, salary and the average salary of the company. So here because we have a department name, can I say first of all we would have to join the department stable as well on to the department name. Yes? So select employee name, e.employee name, d. department name, e.sallary and I also need to list the entire company salary. I will list that in a moment from employees e, join departments d on e. department ID is equal to d. department ID. Now what you want to do is you want to compute and aggregate for each and every attribute without collapsing those attributes, what are you going to do? You are going to use the window function. But in the window function, what are we going to give inside the over clause? Do I want to partition the data on the basis of any particular attribute? No, I do not want to do that. Do I want to sort the data on the basis of any particular attribute? Is that a requirement that I have? No. Now let's see whether this query will work or not. And what you have here is you have the employee name, the department name, the salary and the algorithm. This is how aggregate function can be used in the query along with the other attribute using a window function. All that you have to do is you have to keep the over function empty. You don't have to partition the data on any attribute. There's no need to sort the data on the basis of any attribute. If the aggregate needs to be computed for the entire table, everybody thumbs up with the query in the output is crystal clear to all of your thumbs down. Does anything that does not make sense to anybody present in the session? No, no. We can't use aggregate functions like that. It is because of converting it to a window function is why we are able to do that. Now let me just check if in the last lecture when we discussed the query execution order, did we discuss the window function? Okay. So now everyone here I'll just take a minute and go back over the query execution order again. The first query that is or the first keyword that is always executed is the form of the joint table to identify which tables we're going to be selecting the data from. Then the second is the way our clause to finalize which records from that tables we're going to be selecting for the remainder of the query. Then you have the group by clause whether the data needs to be grouped in any particular order or not. Then you have the having clause to filter those groups on the basis of any particular attributes. Then you have the select to select which attributes you're going to display from the table and then you have the window functions here. So window functions are used as a part of your select clause. Which is where within the select clause itself the window functions gets executed. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Buddy. Yeah, okay. Everyone can you give me a thumbs up if you understand where in the query execution order the window functions are executed? Yes or no? So along with your select clause. Now people if this makes sense to all of you present in the session let's move on to the next problem statement that you will try to solve. Question that I want to solve now is. The question that I want to solve is to rank the employees by salary inside or sorry to rank the employees by their. So performance rating in each department. So what we want is we want to partition the employees in the basis of their departments and in each department we want to rank the employees from one all the way up to the total number of employees in that department based on their performance review. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session the problem statement that we have here. Yes. Now forget about the rank just write the remainder of the query to tell me in what way we would want to output the data. How will you partition the data? How will you order the data? So basically the idea is without thinking about which rank function we are going to be using in this particular solution. In this particular query all I am asking you to identify what would go inside the over clause. How are you going to partition the data and how are you going to sort the data? We will be open here. How many questions we solved in the middle? Seven. Where is your editor in which you are writing the SQL queries? What was the point of someone to the session if you are not writing the queries yourself? Can you open the query? We have SQL installed in your laptop? Can you open and try to write the query? I am giving you a question please. Open the chapter. Open the chapter. 검찰 window mushroom. You will open the pages if anyone write it. Similar Nein. In数 number to the laptop at the computer. Immediately. So, here everyone what I need to do is again because I need the data in each department. I want to rank the employees in each department. Okay. What I am going to be doing is I am going to be writing a SQL query. Select what do I need? I need the employee name, the department name, you get me, we are going to print ID. Join is not something that will teach us anything here. We are going to ignore them. I need the ID, okay. Then the performance rating. Select employee name, department ID, performance rating, okay. Now there is going to be one window function that we are going to write here. Which window function I do not know, okay. The character name, that is not the purpose. Over. Now what you want to do is you want to print the data for each department. So, what are we going to do? We are going to partition the data on the basis of the department ID. Okay. So, what we want to arrange all of the employees in the descending order, okay. On the basis of what, on the basis of the performance rating. Okay. Now along with that, what I also want to do is I also want to rank each employee. And the next type of window functions that we have are rank window functions. In this there are three categories that I have. The first window function is the row number window function. So, now what you have here is you have all the employees in a department arranged by their performance rating given a rank from one to the maximum number of employees in each department. Can everybody give me a yes or this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody. Okay. Yes. Okay. Yes. Row number I have not explained. Okay. But what has row number done? Does that make sense? Okay. Now what is the row number aggregate function? Even the row number aggregate functions. In the window that you have defined, what it does is it gives a number to each record starting from one all the way up till the maximum number of records in that window. So you can see here in the department ID 1 we had six records. The row number gave 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 to each individual employee based on whatever conditions that we have defined, how we have partitioned, how we have arranged the data. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Yes or no? Yes. I asked you to leave, right? And I asked you to tell me your row number is well, right? 6, 7, 8. 6, 7, 8. Please meet me after the session is up. Right? Sir, where is your laptop? Where? Where? Where? Where? Where? Where? I have written a very very good letter. Where? I have written a very good letter. Where? I have written a very good letter. Where? Where is it? Now, what you are trying to write? How many questions did you solve in the medicines? How many questions did you solve in the medicines? 14. 14. 11. So, what I am saying was, row number will rank each row uniquely, no matter even if the attributes have the same value. For example, here you can see that the performance rating attribute has the same value, even then the row number, the row number has given different rank to the employees. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Yes. So, that depends on the SQL version as well. There is no specific fixed answer you have to that, but my SQL will return the data in the order in which they were present in the original tables. So, generally, even when these type of situations happen, right, can I say that there is a possibility that the employees with the equal performance ratings might not be given the correct rating based on how I want to rate them. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you? That is being decided by how the records are present in the table or by any other logic that your databases have put in place. So, how am I going to take control of this? I am going to take control of this by defining a secondary way to arrange the data. So, first of all, let us say I am arranging the data in the descending order on the basis of the performance ratings. Along with that, I want to arrange the data on the basis of the salary in the ascending order. So, what I want is employees earning less, but getting better ratings should get a better rank, okay. And this is the data that does that, this is the query that does that. So, order by clause is something that is used exactly in the way how we use it even outside of the over function. We can have multiple attributes in the order by clause within the over function as well. Everybody thumbs up if the row number window function makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Any confusion, any questions please let me know, I will be happy to answer that. No, okay. Now, next question or the next type of window function. So, the next type of rank window function is just rank. And what will the rank window function do in the window? What is the difference between the row number, the output of the row number and the rank window function everyone? Are you able to spot any difference here? Yes. Okay, absolutely correct. So, if you have partitioned the data and arranged the data on the basis of the performance rating, what it has done is for two people with the same performance rating, it has given them the same rank. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? But at the same time, it has also made sure that if it has given the same rank to two people, it will skip the rank three now. Now, directly it is going to jump to the rank core and that is what your rank function does. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, but what if I don't want to jump to four directly, what if I want three, even if multiple employees have the same rank two, for that what we are going to do is we are going to use the dense rank function and what the dense rank function will do is again the same thing, it is going to get equal rank to the employees with the equal value of the attribute, but it is not going to skip any rank. Everybody present in the session can all of you give me a thumbs up if the rank function makes sense to all of you present in the session, all of the three rank functions, row number, rank and the dense rank. Please give me a thumbs down if there is anything that is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Yes. Sorry. After 3.6 hold on. You can go to the department again. We are partitioning on the basis of the departments. So, it is going to rank within that window, the window that you created. Sorry. Remove the clause of partition by, if you want to rank across all departments, same query, all you need to do is remove the partition part, just use the order by clause and here you have this. Make sense? No, we need the over clause. To use the window function, we need the over clause. That is the syntax of the window function. How will you tell the window function to rank, rank is a window function. You have to tell the window function how you want to rank the data. You want to rank the data by arranging the data and the descending order on the basis of the performance rating. So, it can only be done using the over clause. Every window function, if you want to write any function as a window function, you will have to use the over clause with it, even though it might be empty as well. Now, along with these, the window functions have a very interesting use case and that interesting use case is just a minute everyone. Follow these for that. The next use case of window functions is to be able to compute the running totals and another thing. So, what we have seen here is, if we use the aggregate functions with partition in the over by clause, it gives me the aggregate of each partition, each group. If I do not use the partition by clause, I get the aggregate data of the entire table, correct everywhere. But if I use the aggregate functions with the order by clause, what it does is, it gives me the running total. So, let me explain what we are doing here. We are selecting the employee name, the joining date in the salary, along with that, we are computing the sum of the salary over, order by the joining date as running salary total. So, what we have done is, we have arranged all of the employees in the basis of the joining date, and we are computing a running sum of the salaries. Let me show you what the running sum here means. See, so, the first employee to join the company was Suresh. Suresh was being paid three lakhs per month. At that point of time, the total expense to the company in the form of salary was three lakhs per month. Then, Priya joined on 8th of sorry, 21st of August 2012, with the salary of two lakh 20,000, the running total of the company became five lakh 20,000. Then, the third employee joined Aditi 66, 2016 after four years, for four years, these two employees were just taking salaries. I do not know why. Take care. With the salary of one lakh 35,000, and the running total of the company became 65,000. So, what we have done here is, we have used this aggregate function, along with ordering the data on the basis of one attribute, this aggregate function works as a cumulative aggregate function. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes, superb. Now, I have a question that I will want each and every one of you to solve. Everybody present in the session, can you please take two minutes or take four, five minutes, tell the time I take the attendance? To write, I have shared the question in the chat as well, find the top two highest-quaid employees in each department. Find the top two highest-quaid employees in each department. Line, line, line put them between five, line put them between five. Everyone please look this side. You are not lying right? All I am asking is you are not lying right? You are not lying right? Are you sure? Please be sure to just drop me a message if something like this is the key. Everyone this side please. Everyone this side please. Everyone please take a seat. Everyone please take a seat. Everyone please take a seat. Okay, let me check this. Everyone this side please. Everyone this side please. Everyone please look this side. This side please everybody. Pretty awesome. Everyone this side please. Thank you. Okay, everyone small correction here, okay, a very small correction here which is, so when we combine the aggregate functions and the order by clause within the window, what we get is we don't get the data for each or the data for the entire aggregation at once, what we get is we get a running average. So, if you use the partition by and the order by clause together in the window function, then for the group as well what you are going to get is you are going to get the running data for the group, I will write a query to explain that to all of you. This secret is, okay. Everyone your attendance has been recorded, please make sure to create a nudge in the next 15 minutes if you present in the session. Please do not create a nudge if you not present in the session and attendance of minus three will be awarded if anybody is found doing that. Again for the person who is raising the nudge and the person who came to be the other person as well both of them, today's and three additional attendance will be removed from your total attendance. Now coming back to the direction, yes. Apologies everyone, I will purchase a new cable immediately today. My cable is not behaving properly. So, here everyone if I go back to the previous queries that we have written, right. So, this was the query that we wrote where we only did the order by clause, okay. And then we sorted on the basis of the salary as well which is not going to give you an issue because you are using a rank function but if you are using a sound function, any aggregate function, okay. Everyone, there was someone who was asking me that question, right. Whenever aggregate functions are being used along with the order by clause, it is always going to the case that running averages are going to be computed, or running totals are going to be computed or running aggregates are going to be computed for that particular group. But if I talk about the rank function or the length rank function, that is where the order by clause is intended to be used either for the ranking or for the running averages. Otherwise, order by should not be a part of your over function. If in that case you want to arrange the daytime any specific order when you are using the aggregate query, you should write the order by clause at the end of the query. Make sense? So, in case of aggregate remembers that the order by clause will always give you the running averages of the running aggregates, okay. Super. Now the question that we were trying to solve was to find the top two highest paid employees in each department, okay. So, what do I want to do here? Everyone, can I first of all say that I have to create partitions on the basis of the groups? Can everybody give me a yes, if this makes sense to all of you? Yes, but even after creating the partitions, I want to have a look at the individual data. So, I am going to be using a window function. Now what I want is I want to rank the top two employees, top two highest paid employees in each department, which rank function am I going to be using in this case, everyone? Which rank function will I be using? Will I be using the row number or the rank or the dense rank window function? Sorry, dense rank window function will be using. Why will I be using the dense rank window function? In the dense rank window function, if there are three employees, you have the highest salary, how many employees are we going to see in the output for that department? How many? In the dense rank, everyone, let us say for the department ID 1, if I have three employees whose salary is equal to the highest salary, how many employees are we going to see in the output? Are we going to see two employees in the output? How yes? We are going to see three employees, right, because all three of them are going to have a rank of one, okay. In this particular case, the question is specifically asking me for the top two. So, in case if there are more than two employees which are earning the highest salary, this question is ambiguous. Why is this question ambiguous? Because this question is not giving me a secondary attribute to decide between the top two paid employees, okay. I am going to take that decision myself. So, select employee name salary. I am going to use the row number window function, because I need exactly two employees row number over, partition by department ID order by salary in the descending order, okay. From employees, what is the error here? Select employee name salary row number over partition by department ID order by salary in the descending order from employees. You have another order by salary DEC, say to liquor. Oh sorry, there would not be any comma here, my bad. I am going to give this rank in ALS as well as employee rank so that the table can become readable and this is what the data is. But my question to all of you is, let me put in the department ID as well. So, we are clear on each department as well. Okay. So, what I have is I have for each department the employees rank the basis of their salaries, but do I want all of the employees? No, I do not want all of the employees. I only want the top to employees. So, how am I going to optimize the query to return the top to employees here everyone? What changes am I going to do to return the top to employees? Anybody can explain? Usually, how do I filter my data? Sorry, no, but limit here we cannot do right, limit here will basically put a limit to this table. That is not what we want. Is there any condition that I can impose on the output to make sure that only the top to employees for each department are listed? Where clause I can use? Very good. Let us try to use the where clause. Where employee rank is less than equal to 2. Sorry. Oh, what is happening? Yeah, use can. This is the earliest that I use employee rank. It is still showing unknown clause employee rank in the where clause. Why is it doing that? Can anybody explain to me why is it doing that? Sorry. Where clause is run before? Before? Absolutely correct. So, what we have seen is we have seen the query execution order. In the query execution order, what we have seen that first the select clauses work then the where clause works. Where clause works way before you can compute the window function, you can calculate the window function. So, you cannot filter the data on the basis of the output of the window function in the same query by using a where clause. Then what do I use? Should I use a having clause? Should I use the having clause everyone? No. Having clause is also exclusively used along with the group by clause. It is not a way to filter when row function is being used. It is only used to filter the groups. Then what do I do? Can I say that on the original table, there is no way that I will be able to use the where clause or the filtering? Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all if you present in the session? So, what am I going to do? I am going to use the concept of the derived table that we have discussed in the last session. So, what I am going to do is first of all whatever output that this query is returning, I am going to use the, so I am going to convert this into a sub query. Then what I am going to do is I am going to use the output of this sub query as a table. What is going to be the name of the table? I can give a name or an alias to the table as rank employees. Now, because this is the table that I am actually running the query on the output set of the sub query. Now, I can use a where clause on anything that I want, which is a part of the output set. So, what I am going to do is I am going to add a where clause, where employee rank is less than equal to 2. Now, what I am going to do is I am going to do sorry. And now, what I have is for each department, now you only have the top two employees present. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this query is crystal clear to all of you? Please give me a thumbs down if there is anything about this query that does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Now, we will leave this mix and install a few. Let us all the next question as well. The next question is to find the employees earning above their department average. Everybody, can you please take a couple of minutes and try to solve this? Everyone write the query and just be back in a moment. Okay. So, now again what I want is for each employee, I want the employee and the department average of the employee. One way we can do that again is by using the concept of a sub query, but that will again be very, very slow. So, I am going to be using a window function to compute that. But I want to again filter the data on the basis of a derived attribute from a table. So, what I will have to use is I will have to use the concept of a derivative table again. Right. Select employee name, department ID, salary, average of salary over partition by department ID as department average salary from employees. Now, this is what I need as a derived table. So, I am going to write as let us call it employee data. Now, what I am going to do is I am not going to print all of the attributes. I am only going to print the attributes and I am only going to select the attributes from the table which I need. What I need is select employee ID or employee name. Then what I need is I need the department ID. So, all of this will be basically. Okay. Department ID let us say I will not need. I will remove the department ID. What I need is I need the salary and what I need is I need the department average salary. From this. Okay. As employee data where salary is greater than department average salary and you can see what I have here is I have all of the employees whose salary is greater than the department average salary. I have done that using the concept of a window function and a derivative table. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you thumbs down if the square is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Okay. Now, what I want is let us say I am a very rewarding organization. I run a company where I reward employees very regularly on the basis of the performance ratings. Okay. But I have one problem. I am not that good with SQL. Okay. So, I ask one of my employees to create a query and give me the query which will give me the top to employees in my company based on their performance ratings. Let me just first of all copy the answer for this query as well. Okay. Now, what I first of all want you to do is I want you to write the same query that we have written here. Instead of the top to highest paid employee in each department, I want you to give me the top to highest rated employee in each department. Everybody can you please try to write the query for this? Okay. However, I am going to name please come here with your ID cards and get your attendance as marked. Kartik Dixit, ID like you know Nihar Dahak, Nithuraddy, Ayush Rijit, Kanishka Singh, Vivek Sarathe, Bhavye Bhati, Abhuri Maiji, Amiraj, Harshita Senani, Sahajal Sejal, Pidnekar, Raghue Sharma, Mariamansari, Amrit Kang, Samradi Bombay, Krishindas, Rijul Bansal, Devanshu Raj and Malika Suri. Please come here with your IDs and get your attendance marked. Okay. Meanwhile, everyone else please try to write the query. Okay. Everyone again apologies for this. This is to make sure that if people are not coming to the session, they don't get the attendance and it's better for you people. It's sorry I have to make you come all the way. Malika Suri, Malika Suri, Rijul Bansal, Amiraj Kang, Mariamansari, Sejal Pidnekar, Sejal Pidnekar, 10171, Harshita Senani, Amiraj, Abhuri Maiji, Abhuri your name is also almost in every session coming in this. But Jakeh in the Bhoodhu, please talk to Harsh. Saying that your photo is not identified. No. Ask all three of them if anybody is a friend of them to come and meet me in the Bhood room or anywhere they can find me. You are all alone. 67. You have been marked present for this session. Ibar please do raise a bug from your dashboard if you're not able to see the session. Take care. So, here let's try to write the sequel query for this particular question. So, the sequel query for this particular question will be exactly the same as what we've written for getting the employees based on their salary. Same query we are going to be writing. There's not going to be any difference in the query. The only difference is going to be instead of ordering the employees on the basis of their salary. Now what we're going to do is we're going to order the employee on the basis of their performance rating. And you can see now all of the employees are ranked on the basis of their performance ratings. Everybody a thumbs up with the query is still clear to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Yes. But now my question is see this query that I have written here. Is a query that I want to use very, very frequently. It's not written by me. I want to use very, very frequently. But even if you write the query on the paper and pen and give it to me, I'll make a mistake in writing this query because I'm unaware of sequel at all. All I know about sequel is I know a select star commanding sequel. I'm the owner of the company. People are not even having the guts to come and tell me to learn sequel. So, how can they make sure that I am able to access the data that is present in the query said or in the output of the query without having me write this complex sequel query. Anybody any ideas on that? Anybody any ideas on that? How can I get the same output as what this query will return without using this complicated query? So, the first is I don't want to be writing this query. I am incapable of writing this query. What I will simply do is I will just write this query on the paper and pen. I will ask an employee to write the query on the paper and pen and every time I want the data, I'm going to copy the query from the paper and pen and I'm going to run this. Everybody has thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. But one day I forgot the paper now what? Now let's say I prepare an excel sheet to write the query. But because I am the owner I have worked on so many sheets. Every time I have to get the query it becomes very difficult for me to find the sheet. So, to avoid all of that what you have is you have the same functionality present in sequel as well. First of all if you have written a repeat if you have written a complex query once that you repeatedly need to use should you have the trouble of writing it again and again and again every time that you need to use it. No, he write that is that is not how sequel should be working and that is why we have the concept of use. What is the concept of use? Views are virtual tables that are created from a query. Now what is a virtual table? A virtual table is a table in which no real data ever exists. It basically just stores the query that will be used to generate the results set for that particular table if that table existed in the database. What is the syntax for creating a view? Let me just copy the query. So, the syntax is create view then the name of the view. What name do I need? Highest, performance, department, wise. Now after as what you do is you just paste the sequel query as it is and the view is created. Now because this is a virtual table you will be able to see this in the list of the tables that you have created. So imagine if your CEO is using any sort of a visual editor for example my sequel workbench. He or she will be able to download the data from the table without having to write any query as well. What you have done is you have made the job very, very easy. So, if I want to have a look at what data is present in this particular table. All I am going to do is I am going to do selects from highest performance and I am going to get the same result that the above query was going to return. Keep in mind everyone this is not an actual table. There is no data that is present in the table. It does not mean that because you have created a view all this data is actually present in the highest performance table. No, it is just a way to control as the query that you have created. Any single time you want to use that query instead of that writing the entire query again you can just use the name of the view in which you have saved the query. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you yes. Sorry? Yes. Yes. I will not do that. I will not do that. Yes. You said this. So, which query will get executed? The query that you have used to create the view will get executed. This way. It is a good idea to do that. No, but view may you cannot have insert queries. No, one minute. You are saying that you have inserted an original table in the new editor. Okay. How will it impact the view? Yes. Yes. So, my data is present in the view. But view may not be present in the data. Yes, it is a query. Obviously, if you change the original table then when you print it, then it is the same as the original table. View is just basically a nickname that you have given to the query as simple as that. You don't want to write these complex queries again and again. You want to avoid that reusability, the chances of making a mistake. So, once you have cracked it, you save it in the form of a view. So, whenever you want this table, it can be rendered directly by using this query without actually having to write this query. So, execute, it will be the same. So, if you are going to update the data in the original table, yes, the output of the view is also going to get updated. Make sense? Okay. Everybody present in the session. First of all, can all of you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present here a yes or no? Okay. Just give me one moment. Okay. Okay. Okay. Now, everyone, here, let's say what I am going to do is, I want to give an increment to the top two performers in each department. I want to update the salary of the top two performers in each department. I want to give them 50,000 more. Everybody, can you take a couple of minutes to try and write the query for that? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, everyone, what am I going to do to update? See, what I have is this query apart from the view part. Okay. Gives me the list of the top two employees. Okay. Now, instead of selecting star from this, what I am going to do is, let's say I am just going to select. Okay. What am I going to get in this? If I only select the employee ID, I will only get the list of the employees who are the top two performers. Right. Now, what I want to do is, I want to give each and every one of them an increment of 50,000. So, what I am going to do is, now I am going to do update employees set salary is equal to salary plus 50,000, where and inside where I am going to have this query. Operant should contain one, oh, sorry, where employees, sorry, I have to write the proper condition here, my bad. Where? Employee ID in this. Update employees set salary is equal to salary plus 50,000, where employee ID in and this is the query that I have written. And this is the query that should be working as well. Have I exported that as a? I am going to select. You are saying in the select picture to only contain one. What is the same thing? Oh, sorry, my bad, my bad, my bad, my bad, my bad. I did update it. I did not copy it properly. Extremely sorry, you see. I did update the query earlier, but I was not copying. What I was doing was from the inner query I was returning select star, which means I have a return in the list of the, all the attributes where what I needed was I only needed the employee ID. So, now what we do basically here is from whatever query that we have written here above, we just return the list of the employee IDs and then we use an update query on top of that list that we have returned to check if an employee ID belongs to that list of employees, I am going to increase the salary by 50,000. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes? Now coming on to that, which is basically the next concept of whether, now if I go back to the view that we have created, right? This view also has all of these employees and the salary of these employees. So, instead of going and making the update in the original table, is it possible that I will be able to update the data here and it gets updated in the original table as well? Everybody, do you think something like that would have been built here? Do you think this would have been a functionality present in SQL every one of the years or no? Yes, this is a functionality that is present in SQL. And those type of views are called as updateable views. But there are some constraints in using updateable views, okay? Not every view that you create is an updateable view. There are some very strict constraints on calling a view as an updateable view. So, here everyone, which type of views are not updateable? Generally, the views that are going to use a group by clause or aggregate functions or distinct keywords or window functions will not be updateable. Meaning, if you try to update the data in the view, the data will not be updated in the original table. The data will not be modified in the original table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session in the year or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody. So, very simple, very basic views that you're going to create are the ones that are updateable. This type of a view, which we have created here, which uses the window function to compute the rank is not an updateable view. You cannot modify the original data using the data that is present in the view or using the view as the parameter. Super. So, where can we see all the views that we create? Prince, just show the tables. All of your tables and your views are going to get listed here. If you want to detail. Just do Google search for the command. You will get the command. Let me show you the command as well. There is a lot of views. Okay. So, this is the command show full tables where the table type is equal to view. This will only give you the views and not the tables. Yes, buddy. Update query, right? This one. Okay. That's a good question. Okay. This is not the correct query. Two merge multiple queries together. I've used the incorrect query. This should not be working. I'll tell you what the actual query should be. I mean, if you will go to select start from employees. Thank you for pointing out the mistake. What has happened is the salary of each employee has increased by 50,000. Highest paid employee salary you can check has increased to 35,000 as well. Three lakh of people. So, what will be the correct query? Let me write the correct combination of the query here. Okay. Update. Employees. Okay. Set. Salary is equal to salary plus 50,000. Okay. Now, for which attributes do I want to do that? Where? Employee ID. In. Now, I'm going to write the next set of query. So, select employee ID from. Okay. Now, I'm going to write the inner query. Select employee ID. What else do I want is I want the row number window function, row number over partition by department ID. Order by performance rating. Okay. In the descending order. Okay. From employees as which table should I call it? I should just call it the employee rank stable. Now, this rank that I have also I'm going to write as as employee rank. Okay. Now, on this employee rank stable, I want to do where employee rank is less than equal to 2. Okay. Select employee ID from this as employee rank where employee ID is less than equal to 2. And this is what would finally work. Now, here I have one more bracket you're saying, right? Update employees at salary equal to salary plus 50,000 where employee's ID in. This is where the first bracket starts. Blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah. This is where the bracket should end. And this is where the second bracket should end. No. Just one minute everyone. We're just correcting the query. Update employees at salary equal to salary plus 50,000 where employee ID in. Thank you. Abibi, there is something wrong. Update employee set bracket open, select employee ID from bracket open, just a minute. Employee roll number. Yes. Okay. So now what we can see is a buddy. Now if we see right because this is the correct query that we've written that will not have a correct query. You can see only 16 rows have been updated instead of 30 rows that were updated in that particular query. Right. So what happened in that particular query was all the rows got affected because the query was not proper. And this is what the final query is. Everybody once can all of you give me a thumbs up. If whatever we have discussed in today's session is crystal clear to all of you. Please give me a thumbs down. Is this anything that is not. Thank you. You