you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you You you you with concurrency, we are going to revisit the MOOCs principles, how does interface work, how do extra classes work. So, I believe a lot of you already know about these basics, yes or no? Right? So, you must know what is a class, what is an object, how to write variables and methods inside a class, what is constructor, what is inheritance and then we will move forward to, method overriding polymorphism abstract classes interface and why do we need interfaces in the Java threads that we have. So, in the concurrency we will discuss about something known as threads, how to create threads, why are threads important, but in order to understand how threads are created and actually worked with, we first need to go over all these basics. Okay? So, now tell me what is object oriented programming, what is the basic of object oriented programming? Tell me. Why do we even want to implement OOPs? They are different kinds of programming paradigms like there is functional programming, you must have heard about this procedural programming and then there comes OOPs. So, why is OOP so important? Tell me. Because of the objects, why are objects important? It is basically to mimic the real world. Whenever we are programming, we are just trying to mimic the real world into our programs. Okay? However, we function, we are trying to make our programs function and that is why we require OOPs. Okay? We will get to that in much more detail. But right now, see this program. Now, tell me what all words here, you feel like you know what all these do. Which of these words have you seen before in Gaudet? Are we on your right as well? Tell me. Which of these words have you seen before? What else? You all know, public, why do you all know? What else? This printing line, you know. Do you know what is this implement? Yes? No? Some of you know, some of you don't. Okay? Then this runnable. Okay? So, our focus in today's class is to reach this runnable. Okay? This runnable is something given by Java. So, in today's class, we will discuss the very basics first and then see how runnable works in Java and why do we even require it, especially when it comes to operating system. Okay? So, what is OOPs basically? At OOPs is trying to mimic every real life entity into the program. Writing the programs by thinking in terms of objects or classes. So, in real life, we see these objects everywhere. Like if I tell you, a real life object is a student. Student will have name, role number, batch. Then every student will have actions or methods like studying, attending a class. Then we have a real life object like a phone which will have properties like brand, cat, this battery, price and can have actions like call and charge. Similarly, the others also. Okay? Now, when you think of a operating system, we always talk in the terms of a process. Now, can I mimic this process as an object? Yes, I can. Why? Because every single process that I have will have a process ID. It will have some burst time. It will have some state. Similarly, every process that we have can run. It can wait. It can terminate. Right? So, these will be the actions or methods available in the process. Now, so you all know what a class is. Yes, you all know what a class is. Now class is always a map to create something, a blueprint to create a new student. Whenever we say student, student is always a general idea. I am not pointing to a specific student. Okay? Now, if I think of student, student has attributes of name, role number codes and methods of behaviors like attend class, submit assignment. But is this class student actually going to have any memory in the space, in this, sorry, any space in the memory? Not really. Because we have not stored anything there. And student itself is not a real life entity. It is just a blueprint of how a student will look like. Okay? Now, from this class student, you can create objects, student one and student two. At the moment when you have a class, you have no data sign. It has nothing stored, no memory. But the moment you create an object out of the class, it will start having the memory and you can store values over there. Right? So what is an object? Object is going to be a real instance of the class that we had. Is that clear? Now how do you create an object? You know very well. In order to create a class, you'll have to write a class. And for an object, you'll write new and then call the constructor to actually have the object. We will see the code of this as well. Okay? So what is the difference between class and object? I hope that's very clear. You all have done this multiple times in the past. Class is just a blueprint. The general design does not store any individual data. Okay? And it will be created when I write the class keyword. But an object is a real thing. It's an actual instance of the class. It stores actual data and the new keyword is helping you create it. Okay? This is the very basics of class and object that we know. So we'll just have two very simple quizzes and then we'll learn how to create a process class. Please answer this everyone. Great class is nothing but a simple blueprint. Okay? Okay? Okay. Okay. Object is a real instance of a class. Okay? Now I want you all to create a simple class and this class should be a process. Okay? So the class name should be process. It should have three attributes. Okay? It should have three attributes. One is the process ID. Then is the process name and then you have state. Okay? These are the attributes of the class. Okay? Class name is process. Okay? And I want to have one method in the class. This method is display info. Okay? This will basically display whatever information is available in the class. So can you all go ahead and do it right away? Create a small class with all these details. Okay? I'm giving you two minutes. Please do this and then we will solve the question together. Create a class named process. It should have three attributes. PID process name state. Method is display info. How many of you are comfortable writing codes of classes? Please raise your hand. Okay? Write out. Don't worry if you're not able to do it. I will show you how to do this in detail. State would be ready running all these states. All those who are done creating the process class can now go ahead and create a object of this process class named pre P1 and assign the values to it. Okay? If you are done with the first task, you can go ahead create an object and assign values to it. You can press ES. The moment you are done with the code. Okay? So, you can go ahead and assign values to it. So, here you see the compiler and it already has the main class written. I'll just go over it and create my class. I'll write the class keyword and then write the name of the class named process. Now this process class has a certain number of attributes. Let me change the class. So, it will have a process ID. So, int PID. It will have a process name. So, process name. And it is going to have state. Okay? This is what we were supposed to do. Now we are supposed to create a method named display info. So, we will write display info over here. Okay? Next, you are supposed to simply print the information. So, for printing information, I am going to write the print statement. And here I will print the process ID. So, process ID is PID. Then I will have the name. This is process name. And at last I am going to show the state. Okay? Were you all able to create this? Yes or no? Next, I want you all to create a new process. Which means I want you all to create an actual object. How would you create an actual object out of this class? Can I say I will have to go to the main method. So, the main function over here. Then write process. And I am naming my process P1 is equal to new process. The moment I write this, an object P1 has been created. The type of the object is process. And over here I will write P1.PID. I can assign any PID I want to. I can write the name P1.Process. I can write Chrome over here. And then P1.State is equal to running. Done? So, now I have created the process as well as I have assigned some values to it. Now, when I want to see the information of this process, I simply have to call the display info method. So, you go ahead and do this. Let us run. So, you see a process has been created like this. But tell me, every time I want to create a new object, will I separately go to every single attribute and provide values like this? Is that a very good idea? Not really. So, what can we do here instead? Yes. People at the back are also answering. We can use something which is named as a constructor. Have you guys heard about constructor? Yes. So, what is a constructor? What exactly is a constructor? Correct. A constructor is going to be a special method that runs automatically. The moment a process or the object is created. So, at the moment you are seeing, I write two things in line number 15. I write process p1 equal to new process. New keyword you know very well assigns memory. But it is not creating the object. The process constructor is actually going ahead and putting all the values over here. As of now, there are no values and that is why I have to manually go ahead and assign the values. If I want to, I can create a constructor now and instead of giving these values manually, I will be able to pass some parameters and create a process with those parameters. Let us see how that happens. So, right now you see the process class has no constructor. Whenever we have no constructor, Java gives you a default constructor. So, as of now we will go ahead and create the constructor. Constructor always has the same name as the class. So, process is the name of the class. So, this is the constructor name as well. Then I want to give the PID. I want to give the process name and I want to give the state as well. So, now this dot PID is equal to PID. This dot process name is equal to process name and this dot state is equal to state. Are you all comfortable using the disk keyword? Do you all know what it does? Great. So, now I have created a constructor. So, see I have created a constructor which means that Java will now not provide me a default constructor. Now it is expecting me to call the constructor which you have created. So, instead of passing, let me just comment this out. Instead of writing process P1 equal to new process, I will have to call my own constructor. My constructor is expecting three parameters now. So, we are going to pass the process ID which is 1. Then I am going to pass the process name which is Chrome. Then I am going to pass the state which is running. Let this one process will be created which has all these attributes. Similarly, I can create another process process too. For this also, I will have to pass process ID. I will have to pass a name and then I will be passing the state as well. So, both the new processes have been created. Now I am simply going to call the display info function on both of these. And once I call that, I can see all the attributes available in both my processes. See two processes have been created and we have now done this with the help of a constructor. It is much easier now because I can directly pass all the values in the constructor itself. So, constructor is nothing. It is a special method available in my class which has the same name as the class and it is going to help you provide default values to the objects whenever they are created. Is it clear everyone? Okay. So, we can just go over the rules of constructor now. Concerter will have the same name. It has no return type. Suppose student was the class which I created. This student is the constructor and see here, I am not writing any return type. And by default, the object being created is of the values which are going to pass. These are the rules of constructor. So, I am going to launch a quiz now. Please answer that. Now, constructor will never have a return type. Please remember, void is also one of the return types. Why does not return anything but it is a return type. So, any constructor will never have a return type and hence this is the way you will be writing it. Answer the next one. So, the job of a constructor is to assign values. So, until unless an object is created, how will you assign the values? The class does not have any values to be given. So, as soon as the object is created, the constructor will be called. Now, we are done with the basics. Now, you guys tell me how many of you know what is inheritance? What is inheritance? And why do we even need it in Java? Tell me, what is inheritance and why do we even need that in Java? Yeah, correct. Inheritance means inherit the properties of a parent class. But why do we need it? Why do I want to inherit the properties of someone else? Tell me. And how is it even useful? Absolutely right. Now, suppose I ask you to create a student profile. Very good to prevent code deputation also. Suppose I ask you to create a profile for student and one profile for teacher. And one for staff. Can I say student is going to have a name, so will a teacher and so will the staff. Similarly, student will have ID, teacher will have ID and staff will have ID. Yes. No matter how many users I am creating for a particular, suppose I am creating an application for logging into work or logging into the main gate. Then every time every single user, no matter they are the student, teacher or staff, will always need these two things, basically. We can be definitely more of them as well. But technically, when I am trying to represent these things in terms of classes, I need to give attributes and methods to each class. If I want these attributes in each class, I will have to write it over and over again in no matter how many classes I create. And that is code repetition. And you always say that the code should not be repeated. So we can create a common parent instant. Like instead of creating student, teacher and staff, now I say create a common parent user. And this user has name and ID. Now I can say, student is a user, teacher is a user, staff is a user, and there will be no need to now create separate attributes in the individual classes. Rather, I can simply get these attributes from the common parent user. Is that clear everyone? So what is inheritance in Java? Inheritance simply means that we have a common parent, which will have common properties, common methods. And the child is going to be a more specific version of that parent. And it can inherit all the common properties and behaviors. And not just that, it can have student specific behaviors for the student class. And teacher specific behavior for the teacher class. Is that clear everyone? Try to relate every single concept into the real world. I believe you all will be able to understand. So for writing a parent class, you all know very well. Just write class, then the name of the class, the class has been created. In order to inherit the properties of this particular parent class, I will have to use the extends keyword. So extends keyword is the one which will help you inherit all the properties. So you create a child class over here. This is the child class which you have created. And it is going to extend the person parent class. Is it clear everyone how it is going to function? Any problem at the moment? Whatever code we are writing in class will be available in these links which I have attached. So you can go ahead after the class and see this as well. Will it just take a quick example? So like earlier here I am going to create a user class. Class user. This is going to be my parent class. After creating this user class, I will write int id because id is common to every user. They should do not worry after this will be clear with that. So string name. So this is a parent class name. It is user to attributes I have given. Now I will write a common method login. This is system.how.print.ellin. And I am going to say that whatever the name of the person is, they are logged in. This is what my user class does. This is all the details it provides. Now we will go ahead and create a class student. Student extends user. Now please notice over here I am writing simply class student extends user making student a child class. And then this child class has a separate class specific attribute named course and a class specific method named attend class. Done. Now what does this particular function say? That name is attending and they are attending the course. And in the main I am going to create a student. So I say student s1 is equal to new student. Now I am going to go ahead and sign all the values. You can use the constructor also. I am not using that as of now. And s1.course is equal to Java. So you can clearly see right now that student I am putting in all the values. I do name and course. But does my student class have all those attributes? No. It only has course. Who has the other attributes? The user class has the other attributes which my child student is going to inherit. After this I can write s1.login. The moment I say login again login is a user method and s1.attent class. See both the functions will run properly. So I am logged in. I am on the attending Java. So this is inheritance. We are using common properties available with the parent. Any doubt at the moment? Any doubt? Sure. Please remember extends is the one which you use to get the common properties of a class. Okay? Answer this next question. Extence is the keyword which you are going to use to inherit the properties of a class. Implement is a separate thing which you will discuss later in the class. As of now we are using the extends keyword. Please answer the next one. The child class can access the methods as well as the attributes. Up until these are public or protected my child will be able to access the parent. If it is private then I will not be able to use it. In all the other cases I can use it. Now think about it. If you have a parent and a child which have a method with the same name then whose method should run? Childs method should run? Why? Okay. Great. Anyone else? If the child and the parent have a method with the same name and whose method will be run? The child's method is going to be run and this is known as method overriding. Now why do you think this is important? Tell me why do you think this is important? Tell me why do you think this is important? Correct? Okay. A couple of answers there. Have you guys heard of procedural programming? Yes. So procedural programming works on procedures which means basically functions. Now what this does is that there is a certain controller. I am calling this controller as my parent. And then there is child. In procedural what used to happen? The parent used to control everything inside the child which means that even if child has its own behavior, the parent can control it. Now tell me does the real world work like that? No. Like if it is your parent and you, do you do every single thing that your parents tell you to do? Not really. Okay. You might listen to them but you will do your own will. So this was a problem in procedural programming that whatever the parent used to say, the child had to follow blindly. Okay. The terms are not parent and child. I am just making this like parent child. It is easy to understand but in hopes this does not happen. Okay. You do have a parent. You do have a child but child has its own will. Child gives the own their own version of implementing a method which already exists in the parent. And why this is useful because like this I can say every child has a different behavior. If I have multiple children and they have the exact same behavior, what is the point of having those children? So we will come to overriding now. Overriding is a very good thing because here we can have the same method until the user that okay every single child of mine is going to have this method. Like I say animal class has a sound method. Okay. Animal class has a sound method. And with this animal class I have created an object of dog, one object of cat. Okay. Now both dog and cat can have the sound method. If method overriding was not a thing, both dog and cat will have the same sound. Right. Which means both will be able to bark. Is the cat going to bark? No, obviously not. So that is why we use method overriding. Same. That sound is a function which every single object is going to have but the classes which are inheriting this method can have the own implementation. Meaning animal will have sound but the dog animal created from this, sorry, this dog class created from animal will bark. Cat is going to meow. Now try to think of this as an operating system. Every single task that we have in an operating system is definitely going to execute. It is going to run but now tell me we have seen that process can be anything. A simple program that you write and input output task, a printing task, a downloading task, a backup task and they all are going to execute or run. Now if they all execute in the same way, then no matter which task you run, you click on, everything will give you the same output. Which means printer prints, download prints and backup prints. Is that what you are expecting? No. You want the printer to execute and give me a print result. You want download task to execute and give you downloading and you want backup to execute and backup your files. Is that clear everyone? Now I hope you understand why method overriding is important that even if child is using the methods available in my parent class, it can go and give their own behavior on how we are going to work. Is it clear everyone? Any doubt as of now? Will see a quick example. So here again I create a class user. And I say wide show role. Now this show role method has some implementation and the implementation is that it will show that I am a user. Now similarly I will create child classes. Now this is student. Student is also going to have the same method of show role and here they say I am a student. Similarly a student will extend the user class. Here again you will have teacher, teacher extends again the user. And they are going to say that I am a teacher. Now here I say that I will create a student object. So I say student s1 is equal to new student and then teacher t1 is equal to new teacher. s1 dot show role I am calling which means I am expecting the child method to run and show me I am a student. And then if I write t1 dot show role again I am expecting to the teacher method that that is going to override and run. And see that is what has happened. Is this clear? Now I hope you all are comfortable in writing codes for inheritance and method overriding. Any problem in this? Any problem? The code is also available in the PDF which I have shared you can check that as well. Any problem? Shall we move on? Please answer this. So method overriding is not just having the same name but rather we are going to say that the class or the child class gives its own implementation. Now the next thing that we are going to learn about is polymorphism. Again, have you guys heard about polymorphism? Yes, what exactly is polymorphism? Polymorphism is made with the words polymorph. So what does it mean? Multiple forms. One thing can take multiple forms. Now here again if I take the example of this user and student and teacher, isn't user the main entity? User is the main entity and it is taking multiple forms of student and teacher. Yes or no? Similarly, if I create an animal class, animal class is a parent class. Now if I go ahead write a dog class which extends the animal. So this becomes the first child. Similarly, if I create a class cat which extends animal, it becomes another child. Now both of them are implementing the sound method in a different way. So as of now this is inheritance. Where does the polymorphism come from? Polymorphism comes in when you write this. Now you see here, earlier what he was doing? Student S1 is equal to new student. Teacher T1 is equal to new teacher but what are we doing over here? Animal A1 is equal to new dog. Animal A2 is equal to new cat. Now everything works in the exact same manner but with a very small difference. This right here, this A1, this A1 and this A2, what are these? These are the reference variables, isn't it? Whenever we write arrays also we write int, AR equal to new int. What is that doing? Is AR itself the array? No. It is just a reference type variable. Similarly here also A1, A2 are going to be the reference type variable. And what is the reference type over here? Animal. Animal is the reference type which means one thing. And this one thing is taking multiple forms when I create the object by using the constructors of different classes. So the actual object here is dog but the reference type is animal. Actual object here is cat but the reference type is animal. So one thing is taking multiple forms. Is that clear everyone? Now how are inheritance or overriding and polymorphism working together? That the parent class is being created as a reference. And then the object is being created with the help of the child class. Further the sound method is being called in the child class implementing the child classes method. And that is it. Now why do you think this is of any meaning to us? Why is it important? Tell me. Why do you think it is so important to all of us? Tell me guys why is it so important? Extensibility, how do you apply that? Tell me. We will do this code in a bit. Try to read this infographic. This is pretty much what we have done till now. Then why is polymorphism so important? How can I use it in real life for our own benefit? Any idea? Any idea? Not really. Suppose I want you all to create data of 100 users. If I want to create 100 users every single user will have a different role. So if I want to create a user one and this user one is a student. Then user U2 is a teacher. This is basically what you have to do. And then I want you to show the role of this. Yes? U1 not show role and U2 not show role. Will you be doing this for 100 users? Is this a very good idea? Is there something simple that you can do? Tell me. I want to store all the users in the array. And then I want to see the role of every single user. Tell me what can I do? Yes, correct. So if you think about it, this array right here, it contains what? User data. So what if I create a user type, users array? And in this I create the actual objects. Now you can create however different types of objects you want to create, and the classes that you have created. Yes? At least automatically say that this is the user array. First object is a student type. Then you have a teacher. Then you have admin. And then again you have a student. Isn't it much easier to store? Devashish, you are now right? Yes? So I want to see the role of these users. What will I have to do? Simply iterate on the array. Right? I can say user. User. Is iterating through all the users? And here we can say user.showRoll. Right? So now user here is a type given to this user variable. Users is the array which contains all the data of the actual object. And user.showRoll is helping you simply access one current user. Show their role. Isn't it much easier now? Again, this is a clear example where you can see polymorphism means one reference is possibly having multiple different forms. Okay? Any doubt in this? Any doubt? The only thing we did differently is instead of creating the object of the same name, we are creating the object of the child class. Using the reference type of the parent class. Any doubts? Up till this point. Any doubt? Sure. Do you want to see a code of this? I hope you all can do it. Is the same code as the previous one? Okay? Just instead of creating student one as student, create user as student. Okay? Is it clear? At least say yes. Please answer the next quiz. Okay? Okay. See again, what we write on the left side is just giving you reference. Okay? The next side is always just the reference type of the actual object which is being created over here. Okay? So the actual object is of student. Next. Moving on, what is an abstract class? Tell me. What is an abstract class? You all have discussed this oops in basics of Java, right? Tell me what is an abstract class? Have you guys heard about abstract paintings? What happens in the abstract painting? What is shown in the abstract painting? Does it have a definite meaning? Yeah. So artists just create something out of their imagination. Now it is upon you how you perceive that particular painting. Okay? So I can say that abstract painting or the abstract class is nothing but a general idea. Can a general idea ever be complete? No. Like, okay? So suppose you are coming up with a project. Okay? And you have taken up some problem statement and you have come up with a project. So at the moment, do you know the complete implementation? No. Okay? You might want to add something later on. You might want different people to access your application in different ways. So suppose I can say that vehicle is a general idea. Right? Vehicle is a general idea. This is an abstract idea. Okay? Now, do I know how exactly a vehicle moves? First of all, is vehicle an actual object? Not exactly. A car is a vehicle. An airplane is a vehicle. A boat is a vehicle. A cyclist is a vehicle. Now all these vehicles are going to move in a different way. If a car is going to move on the road, a boat is going to move on the water. Airplane will move in the air. So here I am saying vehicle is a general idea. And a general idea is always incomplete. Now this incomplete idea can have two things. The first thing is a normal method. Okay? It can have any number of normal method. When I am saying it is a normal method, it means that it will have the complete implementation. Right? Here, if you see start, start is a complete implementation method saying vehicle is starting. Now, I can have any number of abstract methods over here. Now to declare a method as abstract, like the abstract keyword in front of it. And then don't give anybody. You can clearly see over here that this move method is an abstract method and it has nobody. Why does it have nobody? As vehicle is an idea, now whatever child I will create from it is going to be a specific entity. Right? If I have a specific entity, now this entity will decide how do I have to move? Right? So now when I create a car class, a child class, which is going to extend the abstract class vehicle. Okay? So vehicle here is a parent class right now, which is also abstract in nature and has one abstract method as move. Okay? So when I say move, this car can implement its own move method. Okay? Similarly, the boat is also extending vehicle and vehicle, this boat, the type is boat is going to move on the water. Okay? So I hope the abstract class is clear. Abstract class basically means I know what to do, but how exactly I have to do it, I have no idea. So an abstract class will be defined with the help of an abstract keyword. It will be a combination of normal and abstract methods and every single child, which is going to inherit the abstract class, will have to give implementation of the method. Okay? Does that make sense everyone? Okay? Great. So again, if you see it is nothing but polymorphism, one vehicle is moving in different ways. Okay? Now there are some important points also that first of all, the abstract class that you have, will not be able to create its own child or this own object. Okay? Which means that something like vehicle V equal to new vehicle is not possible if vehicle is an abstract class. Tell me why? Is something wrong? Tell me. I am saying that vehicle is an abstract class. I have created it with the help of the abstract keyword. I have created a normal method over here. I have given an abstract method over here. The abstract method has no body and the child class is going to complete the abstract method which I have. Okay? So now tell me. I am saying that, Zoheb, you are right. The abstract class cannot create its own object. The abstract class cannot create its own object. Why? Why can't an abstract class create its own object? See again, we are basing object oriented programming on real life. And we can say every single object is a real life entity. Every real life entity knows how exactly to behave in no matter what the method is. So if some methods are incomplete, it means that I do not know how to do that. So if I create a vehicle object out of the vehicle class and I am saying stop, which is an abstract method, I have no idea how to stop. If I am a vehicle, I am running and I do not know how to stop. Should I be allowed to run on the roads? No. That is the entire idea. That the abstract classes will not give you the work to be done in the method. And if you do not know what work is being done, there is no point of creating an object. And that is why every child that you are creating will be, I can say, inheriting the properties of the parent abstract class and then do whatever it wants to. Is it clear everyone any doubt? Okay. Let us do a small example. So I create an abstract class over here. This abstract class is named. Okay. And it says, why start? And as of now, I know how to start. So I will say system.out. Sorry. Got print. And here I am saying, I am going to say vehicle is starting. Next here, I write an abstract method. Abstract void move. And I am not giving any implementation. Then I write a child class car, which is extending this abstract class vehicle. And here, I am going to implement the move method because I can give the implementation. So here, I am going to say that car moves on the road. Like this, you can create multiple child classes. And let me create one more. And here, we say that this is a boat. And boat right here moves on the, moves on water. So in the main class, I am going to write car C is equal to new car. And similarly, boat B is equal to new boat. And here, we can write C dot start. Then C dot move. B dot start. And B dot move. And I can run this. And see, both the methods, the normal method as well as the abstract method is working. Is there any problem in this? Any problem over here? Tell me. Please look at the code and tell me is there any issue? Any problem over here? Okay. Answer this. Okay. So C over here. Now the abstract class is vital. So if I try to do, vehicle B is equal to new vehicle. And then run this. What should be the output? What should be the output right here? Error. See, here, we are saying vehicle is abstract cannot be insanciated, which means object cannot be created. But what if I write this? Is this possible? Tell me. Now written vehicle B equal to new car. Is this possible? Tell me. Yes, it is possible. Why? Because the actual object is car. And the difference type is vehicle. So this is possible. So directly, you cannot create an object of vehicle. There are workarounds how you can use it. Please answer the next question. Why are you guys so confused with the return type? Why is a return type? Okay, returns nothing but it is a return type. So whenever we talk about any abstract class, first of all, we can never create an actual object out of it, but something like this is possible. Okay, this is fine because right now, vehicle is not the actual object. Okay, an abstract method. Abstract method will have no body of its own, because it is having no implementation. See over here. This abstract white stop has no body of its own. Okay. Now I want you all to do a small task. I hope everyone is now comfortable in writing the code of these things. Okay. So I want you all to create a task, okay. Rather, you have to do this at create a task which can print download, okay, calculate, okay, or maybe sense and email. Okay. So right now, if I'm asking you to create a task which does the following jobs, is it the same task which is doing everything? No. It is clearly not the same task. Rather, can I say that this task over here is a general idea of a task, right? This task right here is a general idea and a task can be to print. It can be to download. It can be to calculate and it can be to send an email. Right. So basically, don't you feel like I'm asking you to create an abstract class right now? Abstract class of task, which will have a task name. And then you need to inherit this particular task as different, different child classes which will actually do these jobs. If I give you this question, will you be able to solve it? Sure. Okay. I'm giving this to you as a homework, okay. Think about how to actually write code for this. I'm telling you that this task is an abstract idea and these are the actual objects which you have to create from it. Okay. Take your time and try to do it after the class. Okay. Now, now tell me, how many of you know what is it? You know what is an interface. Tell me how many of you know what is an interface. Have you heard of an interface before? What is an interface? Yes, ma'am, care, or answer, you are not answering. Tell me what is an interface? Okay. In terms of Java, what is an interface? How about it? No. Okay. So, suppose as of now, we have discussed about abstract class. Okay. Isn't abstract class the same as having the common parent? Yes or no? Abstract class is like having a common parent. Okay. Like we said that there is a bird class. Now, the bird class is a parent class. It can have a child class as penguin. It can have child class as chicken. Right. And it can have a class as eagle. Okay. So, right now, if you, not exactly, but in the correct direction, they will see you are right. So, is that correct if I say there is a common parent bird. And with the bird, I have multiple childs naming penguin chicken eagle. Okay. And if I don't even tell you that this is an abstract class, rather I ask you to create such a structure in Java, you will simply go ahead and create the parent child structure. Right. Because penguin can inherit all the attributes and properties of bird. Okay. Same for chicken, same for eagle. Okay. So, right now, I can say that I have breed as an attribute of a bird. Okay. And fly and eat as a function. Yes. Now, tell me, breed is an attribute. Every bird will have a breed. Yes. Every bird can fly. Okay. But tell me, will all the birds fly in the exact same manner? No. Okay. All the birds will not fly in the same manner. And we can easily do this because I can say that now fly can be an abstract method. Right. If bird is an abstract class, it means I have not defined everything. And similarly, I say that this fly can be an abstract method. Yes. Which now means every bird is going to have a breed. Yes. Correct. Every single bird will have a breed. Every single bird can eat and I have told you how to eat. Yes. All the birds can eat. And now I say fly. Now fly is an abstract which means that every single bird can fly however they want to. Correct. But now tell me, is flying only limited to birds? Is there anything in the nature which you have seen flying? Insects, correct. Mosquitoes. Okay. So basically insects, what else can fly? Some fish can fly. Bats, I am considering them as mammals, I am not going to look at. Bats, what else can fly? A plane fly. Superhero fly. Snake, I am not. Okay. Okay. Can I say all the things written in the right. Some humans are not flying. We are not that evolved yet. So anyways, I can say all of these also have the property of flying. Yes or no? All these things have the property of flying. But where have I implemented the fly method? Bird. Does that mean insect is a bird? Does that mean superhero is a bird? No, no superhero is not a bird. Okay. So what is happening over here? There is a clear structural problem that we have. If I look at fly, is fly specific to a common parent? No. Flying is going to be a property or a behavior. Yes. Fly is going to be a property. This should be available freely to no matter which class I belong to. Yes or no? So here the problem statement is saying that I have one method which has been implemented as an abstract method inside that abstract bird class. And this helps us to ensure that every bird flies in a separate manner, which was correct. If I didn't give abstract over here, then also it was a problem. Then every bird had to fly in the same way. Abstracts all that problem. But another problem arise that what if other kinds of classes also want to implement this fly? Will they have to implement their own behavior? If they do that, I'll have to write fly every single time. If I try to inherit it from the abstract bird, then I have to be a bird, which is incorrect as well. So what did we do here that instead of having concrete classes, we came up with something known as interface. We came up with something known as interface. Now interface is simply going to give you the rules on what to do. Right now we are saying fly. This is a rule. You have to fly. How do you have to fly? You take care of it. Does that make sense? Any problem as of now in understanding what we just discussed? So interface is nothing but a simple contract or a rule book. And if any class is implementing my fly method or the interface, which contains the fly method, will have to implement fly. So let us take another example. I say that I want to define the rules only. And that is why I'm using an interface. How to define interface? Write the interface keyword and give any name to the interface. And then write the method which you want to have. Please remember it only has rules. Attributes can be there. I will come to it later. But as of now it only has methods. Then this method is there. But do you have the actual implementation? No. This method says play. No rule is there. The rule is there. No body is there. Now I can say whichever class is going to implement to my interface. This is a playable interface. We'll have to play. Now anything which is playable is going to play. This is what I'm trying to say. Anything which is playable must play something. What to play? How to play? That is your wish. Now who can be playable? Any song on your list can be playable. Any video on your list can be playable. Any game can be playable. Are these going to play in the exact same manner? No. Absolutely not. So you see over here class song, implement playable. When we were trying to inherit the properties of a class we wrote, extends. When I want to implement interface I will write, implement. Someone asked the difference between extends and implement. I hope that is clear. Extence is for extending classes. Inheriting properties of classes, implement is to implement an interface. The song implement is playable. It means it will have to give the implementation of the play method which was stored over here. Similarly, it says playing song, it plays audio. When a video class implement is playable it says play and says playing video. And a game, implement is playable which means it has to give implementation of the play method. And it says start games. Is that clear everyone? Any doubt? Any doubt? Please ask in case you have any doubts. So a couple of rules there. Interface is created using the interface keyword. Any class that has supposed song, it wants to implement the method stored inside this play. We will have to implement the interface. Then please remember the methods available inside the interface will by default be abstract or public in nature. So that everyone can use it. And if I make it private, can anyone use it? No. I want to make sure everyone available is freely able to use this fly method. And that is why I stored it in an interface. Correct. Okay. Next. Whichever class is implemented in the play method, next, whichever class is implementing the interface, it has to provide the complete implementation. If it does not, we will not be able to use it. We will give you error. Secondly, obviously you cannot create an object of an interface. You will have to use the child class to create the object. Then you can definitely use polymorphism over here because playable p equal to new song, playable p equal to video, playable p equal to game is nothing but polymorphism. Is it clear everyone? Any doubt at the moment? Please ask in case you have a doubt. Okay. Which part? This one. It simply means you cannot create an object directly of playable. We will see an example now. So suppose I want to create an interface right now. I will like interface and then give playable. Okay. See, looks like a class, the only difference is instead of writing class keyword, I am writing interface keyword. And then I write void play. See this void play method is also public in nature. Then I say class song implements this playable interface. Okay. And then it has to give an implementation. It has to give an implementation. So I write public void play. Okay. And then I am going to say that playing song. Similarly, I will create another one. Another child class. The child class is known as video and it is implementing the playable interface. And I am saying video is playing. Okay. Absolutely right. So now I say song S is equal to new song. Okay. Now this is possible. Video V is equal to new video. This is also possible. Okay. So if I write S dot play, it will run and V dot play. This will run as well. See. So song object has been created and it is playing. Video object has been created and that is also playing. Right. Now this is possible. Next, if I want to write something like playable, P is equal to new playable. Is this possible? Tell me. What we are trying to do over here is create an object of playable. Is this possible? No. This is not possible. Why is this not possible? Again, the same reason as abstract classes. The method over here has no implementation. How am I even able to run it? I can't. Right. But I can't do something like this. I can write playable. Okay. Playable P is equal to new song. So now because I am using this playable as a reference type, this is possible. So when I do P dot play, P dot play is going to play a song. See. Playable P. Playable is a reference over here. Type of reference rather. And new song. Song is the actual object. So I can play a song. Is it clear now? Okay. What can I read this as? What can I read this as? Tell me. How can I read this song? This line. Okay. Tell me. How can I read this song? This line. Tell me. Song is playing. Song is playing. It is. It is implementing the playable interface. Okay. Now think about it. I have not given anything in the playable. Why? Should I be giving attributes over here? I can. But should I be giving attributes over here? Not very important. Why? Because right now I am saying that it is a rule book. It means it remains same for everyone. And you can do whatever you want with it. So now I want to put attributes in here. They will have to have a final keyword attached to it. Final meaning. The value of this attribute cannot be changed. Okay. So attributes are not really required in the interface. If you want to, you can give it. But it has to be final in nature. Is that clear? I hope I saw your dot also. Okay. Any other problem in interfaces? Think about it and tell me. Now there will be a time when we'll use the interface and the abstract class together also. So please make sure you're comfortable with abstract classes and interfaces both. Any problem? Okay. And please answer this next quiz. Okay. Okay. Okay. So if the answer to your question is yes, we will see it in a bit. Okay. So another quiz. Okay. Before that. Interface and abstract. If you're writing this in Java, these are going to be the keywords. Okay. That defined that this is an abstract class. This is abstract method. This is an interface. When I want to actually use that interface, I will have to write. I will write. And to use the abstract class, I will have to use. Answer the next one. Okay. Great. Okay. The basic idea is that I have to implement whatever is available. Now, when we started the class, we saw something. We saw a small code. My task implements runnable. So now tell me, what is this runnable? Correct. When I'm saying implements runnable, it means that this runnable is nothing, but it is an interface that you have. And this is an interface available with Java. Okay. Now, before we get into this runnable interface, which is already available, we'll try to create our own runnable interface. Okay. So let's create our own task. Okay. So. So first of all, my goal in operating system is to have different tasks, different work. Okay. But all of those processes are going to run. Okay. That is what the process does. It runs. Now, all tasks are different. Okay. And but they are running the run method, which means the implementation of this run method is going to be different. And I can say that this run should be defined in an interface. Yes or no? Right. So now what I want you to do is. So I wanted to go ahead, create an interface. Okay. This interface's name should be MyRanable. Okay. The name of the interface should be MyRanable. And this MyRanable should have only one method named as run. Can you all do that? Yeah. After this, you have to create multiple tasks. Okay. Create separate tasks. Now tasks can be anything whatever you want to. Okay. I'm not asking you to create a separate task class and then inherit from there. Just simply create separate separate tasks and implement the MyRanable method. Can you all do that? Yes. Please write out very simple code. Create print task. Create download task. Okay. And then implement the MyRanable. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. I hope you all were at least able to create the MyRanable interface. Okay. Okay. Okay. And this print task implements MyRanable. Right. And I will provide the implementation over here. Okay. Similarly, I can create multiple other tasks. Like I have created download task. This is me downloading. Similarly, we say that there is a music task which says playing music. And then I have a email task which says sending email. So once I have done this, I can say I have created multiple tasks of my own. And I'm saying that all these tasks will now somehow use my Renable interface. We'll go ahead and now create the objects of these classes. And now I can say that MyRanable task is equal to new print task, common new download task. Next, I can have a new email task. Next, I have new music task. So like this, I have created an array of tasks. And now here, I can say that I can run and fold each loop and run every single task that I have. Yes or no. Can you all do this? Right MyRanable. Create the object of separate classes. Can you all do this? Yes or no? In case you have not done this, please go ahead and complete. So here you are going to write MyRanable task is iterating over all the tasks which I have. And then the tasks are running. Let us check for errors once. So you see over here, I just simply created one task array. The reference type is MyRanable and I'm creating separate separate objects of whatever task I have. And the moment I run the method in that particular object, you say printing file, downloading file, sending email, playing music. Hasn't it made your job much easier? Also, isn't it polymorphism using interfaces? Any doubt at the moment? This is polymorphism using an interface. A print task object is being treated as a MyRanable task. A download task object is being treated as a MyRanable task. Is it clear everyone? Any doubt over here? Now, do one thing in the exact same code that you have. Just remove this line, okay, 1, 2, 3. Remove the MyRanable and instead of implementing MyRanable, simply implement Runable and see what happens. In this code that you have, remove the line number 1, 2, 3, which means remove the MyRanable interface, okay. And instead of implementing MyRanable, say, implement Runable. And tell me what is output. Please import Java files. If you want to remove the interface MyRanable and instead of implementing MyRanable, implement Runable. Similarly, here also, instead of writing MyRanable array, write Runable array. And tell me what happens after you make the set changes. The exact same output is shown, okay. See here, if I just remove this line, okay. This I write as Runable. This is Runable. This is Runable. This is also Runable. Runable task and Unable. And you check. Exact same output. What does this mean? I have removed my interface and still implementing Runable and everything is working in the exact same manner. What do you mean by this? What do you understand by this? That this runable which you are seeing right here was already implemented somewhere. And that is what I meant by saying that Runable interface is already available with Java, okay. You are simply supposed to go ahead and use it. Okay. Runable is very, very common because it only has one single method run and anyone who wants to run it can use it. Is it clear everyone? Okay. So now I hope you all understand every single term which was written in the first code that I showed you in the class. Now, so my next question to you is what is the difference between an abstract class and an interface? We are using polymorphism. We are technically using method over writing, yeah. So what is the actual difference over here? What is the difference between abstract class and interface? I can say the abstract classes were defining a common parent and it makes sense to put them all into the same category. Whereas interfaces are giving you are giving you a common capability. Okay. So whenever your classes will be closely related, then you will use an abstract class. Okay. When you want to you want all the classes to implement a capability, then you will use interface. And in abstract classes, you have the added benefit of having any number of attributes. Whereas in interfaces, those attributes will be given in a little different way. Okay. Is this clear? Okay. Now one more thing, there are different kind of inheritance which you see in programming languages. First of all, you have the single inheritance. Single inheritance is like one parent, one child. Okay. Then you have multi level inheritance. In multi level inheritance, you have one parent, one child and then a child of that child as well. Okay. Next, you have multiple inheritance. Java can implement single inheritance and multi level inheritance. However, it will not be able to implement multiple inheritance. Okay. Multiple inheritance says that there are two parents and the two parents have one single child. Okay. This is not allowed in Java. It is known as a diamond problem. Why is it not allowed? Because whenever we have a class, we expect it to have some some defined normal methods also. So what if a child is seeing the same method in both the parents? Now, whose method will be used? That is the problem. Okay. If it has the same method of the name in the child class, then I can use it directly. But if the parent has the same method, whose method will be used? That was the problem. And that is why Java does not allow multiple inheritance. But we have a work around this that instead of using normal classes, we can have interfaces. Okay. Which means if we have two interfaces, these two interfaces can be implemented by my child. Why? Because now the interface will always have abstract or I can say methods with absolutely nobody. If there is nobody in the both the interfaces, this child can simply implement it without getting confused. We will discuss about this in much more detail in the next class that we have together. Okay. Today's class was more about understanding what are the basics of it. In the next class that we have, we will discuss an example where a class will inherit an abstract class and implement an interface. And then we will move on to creating our mini task system also. Okay. So I hope today's class is clear. Any doubts as of now? Any doubts? Okay. Just a quick summary of what we have done and then we'll end the class. So we have discussed what is exactly whoops every real life object is implemented as a class and an object. What is class a simple blueprint which shows you variables and methods object is a real instance which stores all the actual data. Constructor is a special method which gives values to my object once it is created inheritance is one once the child classes have some common properties which it takes from a parent. It is done to reuse the common features like methods and attributes and we use it by writing the extends keywords. Then we learned about overriding and polymorphism in overriding the student method of the teacher method basically the child's method is going to take over and the parents method is not used. And this is also polymorphism when one thing is taking multiple forms. We can use one thing as multiple forms. Then we learned about abstract classes how it will contain a common base and incomplete parent. And it will have normal methods as well as abstract methods and whichever child then inherits the parent class it is going to get my implementation of the abstract method it has to implement it rather. Interface is more like just a rule book on what all you have to do and you can implement it however you want to we saw this with the playable example and the runable example as well. Runable is very very important we saw two things I can create my own runable method also and I can use the enable method or enable interface defined by Java as well and use it wherever I want to without any restriction. Then if I am defining what exactly something is then we will use abstract classes when we will define what it can do which is the capability I will use interfaces and that is pretty much about what we have been discussing. Now this was important because in the next class that we have together we will talk about processes threads we will talk about runable in much more detail how processes are synced how CMF are created and everything is was dependent on these three concepts that we have learned in today's class. Please practice writing the code as of now because once we move to syncing the code might look difficult even though it is pretty easy it is exactly what we have done in today's class. All the links of the code I have provided in the PDF itself you can go ahead and check it out also have you received the assignments of this new miracles and coding class. In the class that we had together we were having a lot of technical difficulties because my laptop was shutting down so I uploaded a recording of some other section in your class. You can go ahead and watch it in case you are facing difficulties in there please let me know I will either have a separate lap session for it or we can have a class together that is a very important class. So I have uploaded some other sections recording in that in case you are feeling difficulties do let me know type notes have already been given whatever we are doing in class are given using this link that you have you can see this link on the notice board section live notes is the link of the PDF which I write over here and if you want the type notes you can simply go to the lecture notes section of your class you will see it there. In any case you are feeling problems you are facing problems rather do let me know please answer the roll call now. I will not see the photos like according to me the system was not running properly. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.