you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you less than 100 i plus plus system dot out dot print or a element at index i. So, tell me how does this program actually function in your computer? How does this program actually function in your computer? What is the use of the very first line? What is the very first line? Creating an array? When you are creating an array, what happens exactly? How? When you say that the memory gets allocated, it is correct, right? That the array is created and a memory for 100 integers is allocated. But tell me where exactly is the array stored? Do you know it? Have you told the computer where to store it exactly? You all know the concept of stack and heap memory? Yes. So, what is stored in the stack? What is stored in the stack? The reference? So, if we have this array A, sorry, ARR, I can say that right now this does not exactly have the array, but rather some memory value or the address you can say. And this address internally points to a location in the memory, right? Suppose it is 100 memory and this is going to have some address. And this memory will have all zeros as of now as an integer array. Now tell me, do you exactly know where this memory is? You just have the address, but do you know where this address is exactly in the memory? No. Why you the one who allocated this particular space to the array? No, okay? So, the very first question arises, where is the array stored? Remember, when you must be going through your ICP lectures, you must have been told that the computer is dumb. It does not know anything. You have to give step by step instructions even to perform the most simple task. But is memory allocation a very simple task? Not really. But did you tell the computer that where to assign this memory? No. You just sort on command that I want memory for 100 integers and that is it? Nothing else, right? But still this array is getting stored somewhere in the memory. This was the first question. So, the second question that you should come to your mind, if I am not the one giving the computer memory, who gives memory for this array? Okay? Who is going to give memory for this particular array? Computer is dumb. It does not know what to do. I have not given memory to anyone. So, how and who has allotted this memory? This is the second question that pops into your mind. Okay? What is the next thing? So, this is a loop. You have told specifically where to start, till where do you go and what is the increment? You have told everything. But what about this line? System.out.print. The element. First of all, you all know that print. Ln is a function, right? And it is stored in the library. Okay? And the library also, it is just asking to print the particular value. But tell me, if you think about the complexity of it, what is exactly happening? That this is your output screen. Yes? The moment you give the print command, what happens? This data is picked from the array and then it gets displayed on the output screen. Did you exactly tell the computer how to pick data from the memory and display it in the computer? Right? And even more, isn't this output stream an external device? Right? It is an external device. So, again, this is a very complex operation where data is being picked up from the memory and being displayed on the screen. Again, are you the one who is diving into these complexities and telling the computer what to do and how to do? No. You are just writing the command to print it. Okay? Secondly, so the third question was, how does this SOP print on the screen? Right? What next? Think about it. When you are trying to compile and run your program, how is your program actually running? How is your program actually even running? Okay. Tell me, how was your program running? Again, try to go into the complexities for running a program. What do you do? For running the program, you just give two commands or rather if you have the graphical user interface, you would just click on two buttons. One will compile and one will run. Do you know what exactly is the background? Well, if you think about this as a whole and you know the theoretical aspect of it, that the moment you write a program, memory is allocated to it, it goes to the CPU, all the operations will happen in the ALU and then the system bus would carry the output from the ALU to back to the registers that you have. Right? And then you get the answer. Okay? But did we actually talk about how exactly is the variable created? How exactly is the memory allocated? How is the answer or the input force being fed into the memory? And then we are fetching it back, calculating in the ALU and then it is giving you back the answer as the output screen. Right? So you know that all this happens, but you don't know exactly how it happens. Okay? So the next question that we are going to be answering is that how does your code even start the way? Right? Now all these questions, as of now seem like simple questions because we are just again looking at an overview that okay, I have written the program, I have given the commands, now the computer should do everything on its own. Okay? But how is the computer doing it exactly? That is what we are going to learn in this subject. Okay? It is going to be all about operating system, how important is the operating system? What functions does the operating system have? And all these questions are some of the functions of the operating system and nothing else. Okay? So whenever you write some code, the code is pretty simple. Okay? The code is pretty simple and behind the scene, thousands of operations, thousands of operations are happening to exactly make your code run. Okay? Which means memory allocation, CPU time allocation, running the program calculations and then displaying the output. Okay? So today we will begin to understand this invisible system that makes it all happen. And this invisible system is known as the operating system. Okay? As of now, I hope it is all clear to you. Yes? Now operating system is not a completely new word for you all. Right? You all have heard of words like windows, Linux, macOS and right. What are all these things? Are these just simple softwares? Yes or no? They are not simple softwares. Rather, I can say that they are operating systems. Okay? So do all the operating so on on the same device? No. They are different devices and different devices can have different operating systems. But what is going to be common amongst everything? Can I say right now if you are using Apple laptop, you are using the macOS, right? If you are using any other company, you probably have windows all in Linux, right? Are these the exact same software? No. But when you run the same app on it, then everything seems seamless and pretty much the user experience on both the laptops will be the same. Yes? How is it happening? How is it happening? They are definitely different operating systems that you have, but all of them are managing the same thing. And what are the same things which these operating systems manage? Think about it. From whatever we have seen in the programs and we see saw the different questions, tell me what do you think the operating system is managing? The very first thing that we saw, memory, correct? Then, correct? All the operating systems definitely handle the memory. They handle the UI of the device. What else? Propheces, perfect? Propheces or you can say programs? What else? Where is the output getting displayed? Where is the output getting displayed? If you have a computer, don't think of a laptop, think of a computer where you have a separate monitor CPU keyboard mouse, this environment. What do you think the OS is also managing? The display, okay? You can have any kind of display, right? Suppose you have one CPU, you can connect that CPU to your TV also. We have smart TVs now. We can have any kind of LED display. We can have an old monitor. The interface is going to be seamless. I view the one who is going to be concerned on how my CPU will interact with the current monitor that I have. Not really. Everything happens seamlessly. Why? Because your OS also handles all the devices which are being connected to your CPU. We can have a number of operating systems depending on whatever device we have depending on the user preference. But all of them will boil down to these four very major roles. They are definitely more roles. But as of now we have discussed all these. So if I get to the formal definition of the operating system, it is nothing but the manager between the user program and the computer hardware, okay? User or the program is you who is doing a task on the computer and the hardware is the actual hardware setup where something is exactly happening. Does that make sense as of now? We will take a small analogy. Suppose you are going to a restaurant. Okay? So if you are going to a restaurant, what is the task that you want to do? You want to place an order for you to order food and eat, right? So you want to order something. Can you go ahead and directly give this order to the kitchen which is preparing the meal? No. Who do you need? The waiter. If you are ordering in a restaurant, you need a waiter. If you are ordering online, you would need a third party. Applies the matter, Swiggy. So if you think about it, you are the user or the program. Okay? You know very well that the kitchen, the restaurant or the hardware is the one which is actually going to provide you with the output. Okay? Let us say that you are the user and program is the order. Okay? So you know very well that once you have ordered it should go to the restaurant, but actually there is no means for you to directly communicate with the hardware. Okay? So there has to be this waiter and this waiter is nothing but the OS. Okay? So whatever interaction happens is actually between you and the OS and the OS and the hardware. You cannot directly contact the hardware. Okay? So whenever we think of any task happening, that task is not being done by you with the help of the hardware. It is giving the OS instructions to perform a task and the OS is actually the one which is completing that request. Is that clear? That is the main thing that you only place requests. Okay? So as you are placing request now will come on to the functions of the operating system. Okay? Coming back to our example and also the first function is memory management. Now think about it. When you write this program, what is the first line that executes? This one? Okay? Now the moment you are writing new in 100. What does this mean? I locate me some memory in your program or you can say the JVM is going to send a request. Okay? What is the request that I need space for? 100 integers? Right? Again, the command is simply requesting. Okay? Once you have requested that, okay, now give me 100 integers. This request has gone to the OS. So what will the OS do now? What will the OS do? Okay? Where do you think the memory is allocated when these like your arrays requesting some memory or you are requesting some memory in the RAM, right? So the first drop of OS is that is there free space? Is there free space in the RAM? Okay? How all of you done the bitspilani course of programming, the ICP, the C programming thing? No? In IT, we didn't have the C programming? Okay. I will show you a small example. Again, not very important. I just want to show you that sometimes the RAM might not be available for you to use. Okay? So in C programming, you have dynamic memory allocation. I believe everyone knows what is dynamic memory allocation? Yes? So there are functions like catalog, malloc, this is okay, and realloc. All these three functions provide you dynamic memory allocation. What is the dynamic memory allocation? That whenever the user is requesting, then give some memory. Okay? So what happens here that it returns our reference to the memory? Okay? Now as it is dynamic memory allocation, this memory is allocated from the RAM. So sometimes in case you have used it, sometimes you will see that yes, a memory block is allocated. In this case, you get a reference. Sometimes this memory block is not allocated and in that case, you receive a null pointer. I hope everyone knows what is a null pointer. Yes, you must have used this in Java at least null pointers. So whenever memory is allocated, you get a reference. Whenever it is not allocated, it means that memory was not free and you get back a null pointer. So this is what happens when we say that is there free space in the RAM? The OS is checking, is there free space in the RAM? So if you get null, it means that there was no free space in the RAM and whatever you are requesting cannot be done. Okay? In case that yes, there is free space in the RAM. What will be the next step? See, as of now, I just got to know, is there free space or not? Do I know where exactly is that free space? No. So now the OS will check which part of the memory is free? Which part of the memory is free? Is that clear? So yeah. Yeah. Okay. See, whenever these instructions happen, this is going to happen in the RAM. Okay. If there is free space, then it is allocated. Otherwise, we can't allocate it. Then we learn about a concept known as virtual memory. Okay. So again, this is a little advanced topic, which will be learning in a couple of next lectures. Then we will discuss how the virtual memories allocated if the RAM is not free. So coming back to it, OS asks two questions. Is the RAM free? If it is free, where exactly it is free? Because now once you know, where is it free? What will happen? You will get that address. Okay. You remember how when you were doing this stack and heap example, this address was being allocated. So same thing happened. I went to the RAM, checked, is there free space? Where is the free space? Once you get the free space, then this space is allocated to wherever in the variable you were asking for it. Okay. Okay. So then OS allocates a block of memory. If it is free. Okay. Now once the memory block has been allocated, can I say as of now, I have not marked this memory block as used. Have I? If I have not marked the memory block as used, don't you feel like any process, then still see that, okay, this memory block is available. I can use it. Okay. Maybe if you have requested a block for 100 and now right now you're working on only two, this space seems to be free. This space seems to be free. And the next time a program is requesting memory, this space can be allocated. Yes or no? Okay. If you have requested a lot of memory and maybe you're not working on the entire memory at once, the computer might feel that this remaining memory is free and might allocate it to some other program. Is that that something should happen? Is that something that should happen? Not really. Why? Because if two programs are running on the same memory, they will keep on overwriting it. I believe when you were discussing memory allocation in Java, you must have seen how if two arrays have the same address and you make changes in any of the array, the memory gets overwritten. So is that something that you want? Not really. You always want your program to run in isolation so that nobody dampers with your data. Okay. So once the OS allocates this block of memory, it marks it used. Okay. It marks it used. Now marking a memory use solves two purposes. First, that ask the memories now marked use nobody else can tamper through it. And you will know that is the memory free or not. Second, for definitely it will allow your program to run in isolation. Is that clear? Any doubt? Now once all these steps happen, now your array is stored. Now finally, your array is stored. Is that clear? This is just the first line. Now don't you feel like as of now we have actually written just a bunch of sentences, but they must be multiple instructions running in the background to actually make it happen. Definitely there are thousands of instructions which carry the location of the memory to the variable, how the system buses interacting with everything. A lot of things are happening in the background and this all is very seamlessly being managed by the OS. So every program gets its own memory. One program cannot randomly access any other programs memory or thanks to the operating system. Now once memory has been allocated. Okay. How does this process actually run? How does this process actually run? Now whenever you have a program. This program which you have written is nothing but just some text which you have written isn't it? Up until you're writing a Java program and you don't even compile it. Are you able to see what are the errors in your code? No, right. If the compiler is not prompting you about any errors, doesn't it mean that as of now the computer feels like it is nothing but just a piece of code? Only when you run it, the errors will pop up. Okay. So any program is static in nature. No resources are allocated. It is just a piece of text. It does nothing with the instructions. Okay. When exactly will your program run? When exactly will your program run? When you go ahead and compile it and give the run command. Okay. Once this programs is in the running state, it is known as a process. Okay. Now the process is always dynamic in nature. A dynamic process can be anything. It can be a program that you have written. It can be any application that you have on the computer. It can be any document. It can be any sheet. Basically any task on the computer once it is running, it is known as a process. Okay. So when you click on the run button on the program, your program becomes a process. Okay. When I say it becomes a process. It means that now it is in the list of running. Okay. So what OS does here is that the OS is the one which actually runs it and makes it a process. And then adds it to the list of running programs. Okay. Now as we move ahead, you see something very interesting that whenever you are running a computer, are you running just one program at a time? As I said, every single task on your computer is nothing but a program. So are you running one program at a time? No. You right now, if I think you might have your Chrome open, your Chrome is one program. In Chrome also, do you have one single tab open? No. You might have multiple tabs. Are these tabs one single program? No. All these tabs are also different different programs. Then you might have a notepad open or you might have a game playing in the background. Some people have their headphones on with the music app on. Right. All these are different programs. Right. So if everything is a different program is everything running altogether is everything parallel. Tell me is everything running altogether? Yes or no? Everything is running together. Okay. Okay. Now, have you guys read this that some processes are quad core dual core single core. Have you heard about it? So if I explain to you in a very basic language, these cores that you have in your processor are actually workers of your CPU. So if I have a single core, it means I have one worker to work on the task. If I have a dual core, it means I have two workers. Okay. If I have quad core, I have four workers. Now imagine if I have a single core. If I have a single core, how many workers do I have? One worker. Can one worker work on multiple tasks at the same time? No. One worker cannot work on multiple tasks at the same time. Like imagine yourself as teaching assistant. Okay. Now you have three tasks to do. Okay. Are you doing these three tasks simultaneously? Are you doing all these three tasks simultaneously? No. You what will you do instead? You might pick one task. Then stop for a while. Use another or do another task. Stop for a while. Do another task. Isn't this what you do? Yes. And this is exactly what your computer is doing as well. Okay. Multiple instructions cannot work at the same time in the core. Okay. In the core, if it is a single core, one program or one instruction will work at a time. If one thing is working at a time and you are doing multiple programs at the same time in your computer, what exactly is happening? Why do I feel that everything is working altogether? Why do I feel like everything is working altogether? Yeah. Correct. So no matter how many cores you have, each core will take only one task. And there are millions and millions of tasks or instructions happening. Can I have millions of core? No. But what this CPU is doing or what this OS is doing is making sure that you have a list of running tasks. Okay. You have a list of running tasks and what this OS does is it picks tasks from this running queue and puts it in the core to execute once that task is complete. It exits the core and another task is picked from the running queue. Okay. And everything in here happens so fast that it looks like everything is running in the parallel, but exactly it is not. It is working one after the other, but everything is so quick that it looks like everything runs in parallel. Okay. We will discuss about this in much more detail in the next lectures, but as of now this was important to understand the running programs that whenever you are writing a program, it is not the only program in the memory rather. There is a whole list of running programs and once you hit run the OS takes this process and puts it in the list of the running program and once it it's turn is going to come the CPU time. CPU time will be allocated to this particular process and then it will actually run in the core. Is that clear? So it is actually a three step. Yes. Once you hit run the program becomes a process. It goes into the list of the running program and waits for it turn. Once it is waiting, the OS will get to it eventually and then the OS all our it's CPU time to actually execute. Is that clear? Everyone any doubt out as of now we have done two things memory management and process management in memory management. Memory has been allocated in process management. A program becomes a process waits for it turn and then once the CPU time is given that is when the CPU execution actually begins. Okay. Now when the CPU execution is happening if I take the same example. This loop is going to run and we have learned in the past that every instruction runs one by one. So once so not system codes. So CPU executes all the instructions one by one. Okay. And the OS ensures that the program that you have gets CPU time. When I say it gets CPU time it means that it gets the chance to get into the code to actually execute. Okay. And then all the other programs all the other programs also get fair amount of time to execute. Okay. Now this is also something very very important. As we just discussed that there is a whole running queue being maintained and from this process is picked and put into the CPU. Now think about it. If we allow every single program to run in a code there might be some programs which take longer than the others. Right. So let us take a very simple example. Suppose you have P1 P2 P3 and P4. These are the four programs that you want to run in your CPU and we have only one single core. What will one single core mean that one program at a time. Okay. Now suppose this P1 takes 10 seconds P2 takes 20 seconds and P3 takes 1000 seconds and P4 takes only one second. Okay. Now according to us one program will go complete it execution and go out of the core. Okay. So the first program that executes is P1. If P1 is executing P1 has entered in the code. Okay. 10 seconds have elapsed as 10 seconds are complete. P1 is also complete and it moves out of the code and the job is done. Next you see P2 comes in as P2 comes in P2 is executed. Okay. As P2 is executing and 20 seconds are elapsed I can say that P2 also exits the core. Okay. Now comes P3. Okay. And P3 is taking how much time 1000 seconds. Okay. If P3 is taking 1000 seconds and P3 is in the core. Don't you feel like P3 right now is hogging all the resources and it is taking over all the time that the CPU has. Okay. Now as you are working on computers and nothing opens in just one single second. What do you feel has happened to your computer? Tell me if you are opening a particular app and it takes more than 10 seconds. What do you think is happening? It is lagging right. Do what you want to computer lag? No right. Nobody wants a computer to lag. Under this day and age late and see is the new dead. Once we see that something is adding very late we see it is useless. We don't want it speed is something what we need. So if this P3 is taking 1000 seconds our performance of the CPU is dropping definitely because all the resources are being allocated to one single process. Okay. So we have allowed our program to get CPU time but it is unfair to the other programs. Okay. What would we want instead? That the other processes which are taking lesser amount of time should execute first. Right. If you think about it okay P3 was running but after some time you say that okay P3 you should come out of the core and wait for a bit. Okay. Let the other process complete its task. So what have you done? You have not removed P3 completely. You have put P3 on a pause. As P3 is on a pause P4 executes as P4 executes P4 was only one simple second and it is complete. Once it is complete it can come out of the core and now you can bring back your P3 and let it execute. And you see no other process is waiting in the queue. If no other process is waiting your remaining processes can work in peace. So what are you doing? You are allowing other programs also to get a fair share of time in the CPU. Okay. This is something again which is a very important task and we will be discussing in most probably in the third lecture. But you should know about this that CPU does not just say that all the program should take up all the resources and keep running in the core. But rather it says that you should use a shared resource in a I can say more fair manner. Okay. Keep our shuffling between all the users. Okay. And this is known as CPU execution. Is this clear? Any doubt at the moment? Here sure. Okay. Real life example as in when you open an app or something in real time. Which one? Okay. Suppose you have VS code open. Okay. And in the VS code you are running a program. Okay. When you run a program multiple things happen. This will load into the memory. Okay. Then I can say once the program loads into the memory, the steps happen and the other memory which is used for the program is being allocated. Okay. Then you have to run a program while you are running your VS code. Maybe you also have open Spotify. Okay. And then you have a game open as well. Okay. Now as compared to the three, don't you feel like the game is the one which has heavier graphics and needs more time to load in the memory. Right. So if the game is loading to the memory, will I just pause for the game to load completely and then move to VS code? No. If you are running everything is parallel. You will see that Spotify will be loaded into the memory as it is a background process which keeps on running. Okay. Then the game is still being loaded in the memory. Okay. It is running in the background. I just don't get to know about it because the computer is hitting play pause on it. Okay. Even better example. Do you know about parent and child classes in Java parent child class. How do I put it? Okay. So like you have parent and child classes, you have something known as parent and child process also. Okay. So what happens that is this child is actually a copy of this parent and nothing else. Okay. So if this switching of app from the CPU to come out, wait, was not happening. What would happen that the parent would run completely until whatever time you have and then the child would come into the picture and then the child would run for its completion. But what exactly happens if I run a program, you will notice that parent runs then child runs then again parent runs then again child runs. Okay. Same thing is what I say. It is running in the background. So when you have suppose a single core, the performance will be slow because definitely game is a heavier process. I can say it is running in the background. Suppose 2% of the game is loaded at this moment. The CPU will switch to the program and load the memory. Okay. Then again I will go back maybe 5% of the game is loaded and then I will go back and the memory will be allocated. Okay. So you see that Spotify is something which was the quickest is load into the memory and the program keeps on running. We scored and game are running in now in parallel how by by forcation of a time slice. 5 seconds loading is done. 5 seconds load of memory. 5 seconds loading is done. 5 seconds load of memory. So if you must have seen when your computer is very slow and your game is loading, you might see that the graph is moves is not smooth 1 2 3 4 sometimes it jumps from 2 to 5 2 to 10 like that. So what is happening there? It is coming out of CPU taking some time going back loading completely coming out. So that is the lag which you experience over there. But when you have quad core processors what can happen? One dedicated core can be given to your game and that is by the loading is much faster over there. Okay. So that is a more real life example. This example also we will do in the in the next class that we have and you will see how exactly the switching between the apps is happening. Okay. Any other doubt over here? Any other doubt? Yes. There is something known as process control block again. This is something which is there for the next class. Today we will just focus on what the functions are. Okay. In the next class we see how exactly this happens. Okay. How the data is maintained. What all spaces, billet store, how will I know where to go back all of that is in the next class. Okay. I wanted to tell you this because it was important on how the CPU or the OS ensures that you have fair usage. Otherwise if you think about it and they are multiple programs everything is running maybe some some processes this starve because they were never given the CPU. Okay. Again more on this in the next class. Okay. Now once the CPU is doing its task the next very important thing which happens what system calls. Okay. Now if you remember in the beginning itself I told you that the user or the program cannot directly talk to the hardware. Can it tell me we have discussed your program that you have written can't directly talk to the hardware. And don't you feel like that was the reason I was not able to allocate memory for myself because I am not see where is the memory the memories in the hardware. Who is requesting your program is requesting but because your program cannot talk to the hardware that was the main reason memory was not being directly allocated to you. What is happening instead what happens instead is that your program is going to pass a request to the OS and the OS actually handles the hardware and finishes your request. Is that clear you are not talking to hardware you are passing the request to the OS and the OS handles the task and works with the hardware. Okay. And these requests these requests are these messages that you are giving to the operating system this is what is known as system call. Okay. These are system calls system calls are nothing but I can say a bridge between your OS and your user program. Okay. The simple things like allocate memory, a print or certain command on the screen. Okay. All that is done through system calls like this line. What is this line this line is simple command it is requesting it is requesting the OS through something known as a system call and the system call is nothing but a simple message. Now your OS will go to the hardware get the memory and allocate to your computer. Does that make sense. So just think of a system call as nothing but a way how your program talks to the operating system. Is that clear? Any doubt up till now. Any doubt up till now. Think about of all the things that we have done we are technically almost done with the program we have allocated memory to the program we have made sure it's now a process we have given its execution time and then we have made the system calls for the OS to actually give it memory give it the printing access and everything. Okay. Now the next thing that comes to your mind as I said that whatever input output devices that you have are external devices they are not the CPU spot they are external devices. If you have seen the one human architecture for computer is the monitor marked as an internal part of the CPU no it is marked as an external device. So don't you feel like I am not the one controlling this particular device when you give the command to bring something when you give the command to bring something your program is requesting it basically again your program request. And the OS is going to receive this request and what is this program request which you are placing what is this program request which has been placed. No, this program request is a system call. This is a system call which is happening. Now once the OS receives the request the OS uses a device driver. OS is going to use a device driver. If you must have installed your OS sometime or installed a new device you must have seen that if your devices are not compatible it will ask you to install some device drivers. If it is just a simple example some people in the last row what's up please stop talking. You must have seen that whenever you in plug in our new device it asks you to install some device drivers. This is the software dedicated for the whatever hardware you are going to use and these drivers these drivers communicate with the screen. And that is how exactly the output appears over here. So your program or you do not know how exactly the screen is working. The OS is handling all the complexity by talking to device driver the device driver then communicate to the screen and every output is then printed. So again it is kind of encapsulating all the complexities of your hardware. Is that clear everyone? So you can say device management is also done by your OS itself. Next comes file management. You all save your code file right you all save your code file either as Java files or as text files. If not you have to grams you must have same some normal docs normal sheets right. So all these code files are being stored somewhere. Now are you responsible to see you can definitely go ahead and pick a file path at which your particular file will be stored. But do you always pick the path? Do you always pick the path? Do you always say that okay I have to go to this location only. The moment you press download or any file on the internet it automatically goes into the downloaded folder. Yes how does that happen? Because your OS is the one deciding. OS decides where to store the file on a disk. You can definitely go ahead as an admin and change the location of a file. You can decide where it can go but it does offer you a default path. And it maintains something very interesting which is the entire file system. And whenever you want to retrieve a file that is also done by the OS itself. You all know very well how it maculate the directory system of our computers. You have entries you have folders you have files you have every single location. And even when you don't know the exact location of a file you can just search for your file name and your OS will show where exactly it is. So internally OS maintains a very good file system and every time you just write the files name it retries that files name and shows it to you. It shows the exact location of it. And this is again a very important task that you are always does. Otherwise you will be just I can say overflow with files and you will not be able to find anything. Same if you must have noticed once you compile your Java file and run it to file circulated. Are you the one who deciding where this file is exactly being stored? How the memory is being given? No. Okay every complexity is handled by the OS itself. And next comes something very very interesting and very important is security. Now if I don't talk about a multi user system just talk about a single user system. Suppose you have a phone right on your phone you have multiple apps right. Imagine that you have just installed Instagram and you have gallery. Once this Instagram is a new app is it able to directly access every single photo available in the gallery? No. Well technically it is your phone. People at the back please stop talking. So I was saying that it is your phone. Your account has been locked in every single app that you are using is under your email ID. But whenever you install a new app what is the first thing it asks when you open the camera or the file section? Permission right that can I access all the files is their limited access and everything like that. Now according to you it is so simple it is my phone. My app can access all the files like if I'm using Instagram I would like it to access all the files in the gallery. Because that is where I upload from. But is this a default operation? No. The OS is going to say that do you want to give this app the access or not? Isn't this a very secure system? If you think about it this Instagram and the gallery are two different programs and as I told you earlier that the OS is going to isolate all the programs. The OS will isolate all the programs meaning that no one can access any memory of some other program. Okay. There are two programs P1 and P2. P1 P2 will have separate memory P1 cannot access P2 until unless the user says it can. Similarly Instagram and gallery over here are two different programs and they cannot access each other's memory until and unless the user says. Okay. So the OS is going to isolate every single program and it controls the permissions who can access what? Okay. Now this might seem like a very mundane thing when you are working on your individual device. But think about if you are working in a this I can say distributed system. Okay. Where multiple people have access to a shared resource. Would you want your files to be shared by anyone else? No. You would want them to be secure. Okay. And all these complexities are by default handled by the OS. Okay. So now if suppose I have one computer they can be multiple profiles. Yes. They can be multiple profiles. One profile by default is the admin profile all the other profiles are the guest profiles and you can decide which profile gets what kind of privileges. Right. This is also control permissions. So whenever one profile tries to access something for the other profile you are not allowed by default. Similarly, even when you are running anything on the same system the computer sometimes asks for admin. The same admin console and admin permissions. Why? Because it cannot just allow anyone and everyone to access the crucial details of how your program is stored and where it is stored. Okay. And what data does it carry? Okay. So it is going to prevent misuse. Okay. It is going to prevent misuse. Now this was a single user environment. There are also multi user environments. Okay. And then multi level environments what happens? Suppose this is one network. It is one single CPU and multiple desktops are connected to it. Okay. All right. Let us take an even simple example. This is a printer. Okay. Like now in your college you have one single printer. Okay. And all of you are using that single printer. Okay. So what is the program that you can execute giving print commands? Giving print commands is what you can do. Right. Now can it happen that your printer crashes? Yes, it can happen. Now think about it. If all four of you are accessing the same printer and the printer crashes and you don't know that the printer has crashed. What would you feel like that your print command has not passed through and there might be something wrong with my print command itself. But what exactly is happening? The resource which you had that is the one that crashed. Okay. So the OS will maintain such I can say isolations or accounting statistics which will make sure that every time you know that the printer is working or it is not working. If it is not working, it will not even allow any user to go ahead and access that crashed resource. Okay. And again, if it is avoiding the crash of one resource, it can avoid the crash of multiple other computers. So again, this is something which we'll be seeing in much more detail in the later classes. But your OS also provides prevents crashes because it is isolating every single program that you. Okay. So you see with all the things that we have learned, the operating system is so crucial that you program can't even run without the OS because the OS was the one which allocated memory to you. Right. Which has given you CPU time to execute it has shown you how to handle the output. It has shown you how the hardware works or other I can say the whole hardware is being controlled by your OS. So your program is just a piece of code. It cannot handle the hardware directly because the hardware is too complex. Everything will run through the computer. Is that clear everyone any doubt as of now? Any doubt? So tell me if I go ahead and remove OS from your computer, will you be able to do anything? There is nothing possible without the computer. Okay. This is the reason we are saying that your code any program any app is just a piece of text and nothing it. It becomes execution. It becomes a process only when the OS allows it to become a process. Okay. So these words of internal functions of the OS. I will request you all to please take five minutes go through whatever we have like discussed till now and then we'll move on to a very simple diagram of the OS. Some of these things is what we have discussed already but some things are new and we will discuss it in a while just go through whatever we have done till now and tell me if you have any doubts. I have updated the notes. Please go to the notes the link is shared in the notice board. Go through that and tell me if you have any doubts. Okay. Okay. That is not something I need to discuss in detail is just that whenever you have a CPU. You will have a monitor right you will have a mouse you will have a keyboard right. So all this is collected to the CPU so you will see that this setup is not exactly the part of the CPU rather these are external devices. So whenever you want to connect any device to your CPU you will have something known as a device driver device driver is nothing but a software which allows your device to connect with your CPU allows the permission to use it. It allows basically all the permissions that you have to use memory to use display to actually pick input from the keyboard all these permissions are being allowed by the device drivers. So what happens is that whenever the user is using this input. So what is happening some instructions are being given to the CPU and these instructions cannot be directly given to the CPU because I am just pressing a key. Do I know what happens exactly when I press a key. I just write a b cd but that automatically appears on the monitor what I do I know what is happening in the background how the data is going over there when it is a completely different device right how the data being let going there. So what happens is that the OS is going to interact with the device driver it is going to say that okay now you have the permission to show everything on my computer. Access the memory available in the CPU and then work on it okay that is what is happening and that means job of the OS is to exactly being touched with the device driver basically it is the one controlling it okay again OS is not exactly the one who is making the device device work device drivers are making the device work but OS is interacting with the device. Any other doubt. OS is such a subject there you can literally point at anything and it is a new concept like we just saw that CPU scheduling was one concept but inside CPU scheduling also they were multiple other concepts how the data is going to the CPU within coming out of it what is the time slice how it the all the algorithms are waiting in my running queue everything is a different concept. Not really there is something different we will discuss that okay so thread is like a smaller or lighter process it has lesser resources as compared to the process okay the different program that are running that are just programs as we go in the next class we will see a process take diagram okay wherever you will see how a program transitions from new to ready to waiting to exit okay the entire program is there. Ram is basically what you have registers and ram is where you the your this boot up is stored entirely and that is the OS part that is why you cannot access every single bit of your RAM because that is dedicated to your OS okay see once you run your system you see a boot up process that is basically your OS loading into the computer and that is itself stored in the RAM and you cannot exactly completely use the RAM like if you empty out your computer entirely and then also see the memory fragmentation you see some part is still reserved for the OS because that is something we cannot erase okay pardon. Hi well we are talking about the RAM which has a lot more data okay again when we will move further in the next lecture we will see how shared memory works how the RAM works then we will see the concept of virtual memory right we will also see how read only memory contains the OS okay all those it will be shared any other doubt any other doubt shall we move on okay so so we saw that how this is an entire computer now in this computer you can see that this is the level of user and other system programs okay this is the hardware these are entirely two separate layers and then there is one big layer and this big layer is the operating system so operating system is not just a bunch of services it is also a user interface okay the operating system also provides you with the user interface right like we see windows or macOS are these just programs written in the back in no you can actually see an interface on your screen right so this user interface that we have can be of multiple types tell me what all kind of user interfaces have you guys used GYS the water you were you currently use the graphical user interface everything is so simple so easy just click on something and it the task is done what is the other kind of use you why you have used the CLI okay command line interface you have used okay and everything is that you have used T UI what is that terminal user interface okay there is one more thing known as the batch interface have you ever heard of the batch interface have you heard about it okay generally what happens you give one instruction and run it give another instruction and run it this is the command line interface one by one all the instructions are run okay in batch interface what happens you can actually create files and you can write code in these files okay and whatever commands are written inside this files once you execute it it runs all together okay so GY is the simplest one where you just see icons and very user friendly the other one is CLI one by one terminal is basically the same thing you get one by one instructions and the batch interfaces the one where you create files write all the commands in that one file and executed at its end and the whole thing will be complete okay so all your always that you have provides different kind of user interfaces it can provide you multiple ones as well okay so you see how the OS is giving you user interface also then with the help of these you can actually make requests what other requests the system calls that you have seen okay system calls again you will see at demo and see how system calls actually look like in the OS okay then the services also you have seen whatever services the OS has provided you you have seen the how the OS has helped you in program execution you have seen how OS helps you in iO operations how it maintains such a huge file system also it helps you in communication how different programs interact amongst each other how multiple user interact multiple users interact how the resources allocated whenever we will talk about resources in terms of computer we will talk about mainly CPU type and memory okay then next comes security and protection you just saw how the all the programs which you have on the systems are run in an isolation so that every program can have its own memory and nothing is being overwritten similarly any kind of error which is happening either in the program or in the device is also is also handled by the operating system okay now we will come to accounting okay now accounting is one of the very important functions which you will see of the OS and it works in multiple ways okay first of all I can say that whatever resource you have will be limited right you only have a limited amount of resource you do not have unlimited resources be it memory be it CPU time be it any kind of physical resource like a printer it is all limited in number now if you have multiple programs all these multiple programs can request the same resource if I take a simple example all these four programs can request the same printer right so if one particular user is using the printer how do I know which person is using the printer okay and this is something which the CPU keeps track of okay and it keeps track of it by using accounting it keeps track what resource is being used okay what resource is being used by which user or by which program is the resource being used okay all the records of the user is maintained by the CPU okay and if you think about it when we are working in a multi user environment this will become so important for analyzing and improving the system performance like what example can we take okay so you have some cloud memory okay you have some cloud memory and as of now it is empty okay and whatever your users are are sitting idle at the moment okay if the user sitting idle and the memory is not being used should you be charged for this cloud memory you shouldn't be okay so I'll use the one who will keep checking every time that I'm using the cloud memory or not I'm using the cloud memory or not what the OS does is it keeps track whether I'm using a memory or not and then it can contact your cloud partner this all comes into SAS which is software as service so it can contact the cloud company and say that I am not using the memory as of now don't build me for this current usage. Whenever P1 P2 P3 P4 are using the cloud memory that is when you should actually be paying for your services okay again this is a very higher level example I'm just going through an overview that OS can keep track of what resources are being used and charge for only those resources in case you are taking it from a third party okay same thing if one part of the memory is crashing or is corrupted okay if one part of the memory is corrupted and every single user is trying to access the same memory some part of the program will also be corrupted you might not get the correct answer some problems might occur now if you know the memories corrupted will you allow all the programs to actually use this memory no okay but this is where how accounting comes into picture because we know very well what all resources are there how well we are using the resources is there a problem occurring in the resources who was currently using the resource everything can be controlled by the OS okay this is the first thing second is that have you all use Google docs have you all use Google docs so in Google docs also multiple people can access the same document all if you can write anything or erase anything okay of course a user comes in and erases everything okay this is a shared memory technically a user has come in and erase everything so now all the other users will they be stuck with an empty memory no not really what happens here is that you must have seen something known as versions in your Google docs what are versions versions are like snap shots of your document clearly mentioning what data is there and who has edited the data okay so that even if somebody has erase data completely you can revert back to the last version where data was available similarly you can also check who is actually changing the data over there okay now this was an example of Google docs now think about it if this was shared memory shared memory used by multiple programs right if multiple programs are coming and accessing this and somebody erases it or somebody does something or it corrupts the memory you will know what watch watch program or what user has an athlete up to the memory and then maybe you will not allow that person to enter the memory again and obviously you can roll back to the previous safe version of the computer okay this is what accounting is is this clear everyone what is accounting how always handles everything how it makes sure that all the resources are at one place it has a definite record for every single detail that you have any doubt any doubt in accounting case ask in case you have any doubt and this by the way this version thing which I talked about this will be stored in process control block it is a concept which we learn in the next class that we have to get them so with the help of this diagram that I have shown you you can clearly understand that not just the OS is ensuring smooth and efficient operation of the entire system but it is also giving you user interface and it is also acting like a resource manager for you all okay so OS has multiple roles to play it gives you interface it acts as a resource manager and it just ensures the overall smooth and efficient execution is this clear everyone any doubt is there any doubt in the next class without up till this point with this we are done with all the functions which you are OS has to offer do you have any questions any problems again we have discussed the very overview of a lot of complex topics which will be discussing in the next classes so as of now do you have any doubts any issues yes any problems please ask to be in the next class we will also discuss something about context switching how data is being transferred in the memory and the program every time and how different programs enter the CPU everything will come into that any doubts up till this point if not we can now move on to the next topic which is system calls in system calls we also see a demo how the operating system exactly works shall we move on yeah moving on we have system calls so as we have seen system calls are nothing but an interface through which the user program is going to request services from the operating system okay so till now we have directly seen that definitely my program is not able to to directly talk to the hardware whenever a program needs something like writing into a file getting memory printing something it is always and always supposed to make a system call to the OS okay but it is nothing the system call is nothing but it is acting like a bridge between the user applications the programs and the operating system okay so any simple task which you need to perform will be done by the system calls only okay and again all of this seems very theoretical so what we will do we will go and see a demo right now okay so it's the moment okay so I'm going to write a very small Java program and this Java program will write something into a file have you guys ever worked with files before how to create file how to create so I will write a system call demo so here I will just paste the code because that code is not very important but I will explain you what is happening in that code okay so right now what we are doing over here we are creating a file pointer and I'm naming that file demo dot txt so I have creating a simple text file over here and in this text file I'm using the get byte function and writing hello OS inside that file okay right is the function get bytes basically gives you the space to write in the file and I'm writing hello OS over here and as it is a pointer it is always a good thing to open the file and then close the file so I'm going ahead and closing the file okay so this is the task which I have done in the program I have created a file name as demo dot txt I have written hello OS inside that file I have closed the file after the closing of the file I am writing done in my program so this done is the output of the program hello OS is the content of the demo txt file as of now do you have any doubt in the code which you see over here any doubt in the code file output stream is just a way to open the file how you do it in Java that is okay it is not something which you will be using that's why I'm not dwelling into the code right now so I have created a text file now I will just save it okay so after saving it let us see if it is available with us and yeah the file has been created okay now once the file has been created we will go ahead and compile the file and see any errors are there or not this is the file name right okay so they were no errors now I can run my file so when I'm running the file here so it's called demo what should be the output of my file what should be the output of my file right now done right and yeah it shows done now as it is done it means that I would have also created a demo dot txt file okay let us see that demo dot txt file okay and you see that I see hello OS over here what does this mean that not only the demo dot txt file was created hello OS was stored inside the file and when I open the demo dot txt file I see the hello OS output okay which means that our program works but who actually did this work did I do any work exactly was either one to fetch memory for the file was either one who allocated the pointer and writing something I have given input and that is all right whether just help of three four commands I have created the file but what exactly happened over here let us see that okay so for this we will open another terminal do you guys know about the pseudo command what does the pseudo command do it gives you the admin access to observe the admin level activities okay so as of now what am I doing I am trying to create a file so I want to know what the file usage is like okay so I want to access whatever is going on in the file system usage okay and I want to make it in readable more so I will write w and then I'm using the grip command because as of now when I use FS usage a lot of files a lot of files can be running in the background also okay a lot of other apps might be open so as of now I just want to see what is going on with my demo dot txt file so I write grip demo dot txt once you run this you will get a prompt to enter the file from to enter your password enter your password over here and you see here I will go and run my system demo so once I run my Java program you see what is happening in the background okay those calls which are being made those are the system calls that you have okay you see different system calls like get attribute list get attributes list is helping you get to that particular file and then you open the file okay once you are able to open the file you get this get attribute list and see what is going on and you have run it okay once you have run this if I go ahead now and see my text file okay see another system call has happened and what are the system call system call is reading the data because people at the back what is up do you want to go out of the class so see I have already written in the file and I have see it already and that's why when I run or open this txt file and see the system level activity you can see something like Rd data what is Rd data Rd data is a system call which means reading okay if you do the same program on a windows laptop you might see a read system call in the mac over just known as the Rd data okay similarly if you are writing over here it would have shown you WR data which means I am writing data right now okay so all these things which you see over here are nothing but the system call now you must be able to notice even though my program was only of 34 lines but the system calls are NN number right every time you run the program I run the program but just writing Java and then the file name it is just one command for me but a lot of things go in the background and this is nothing but the system call and that is how your OS is actually working is that clear again so we never open the file we never went to write on the disk we were never closing the file you are just running a simple program who is doing it your OS is doing it we have simply requested OS is the one executing okay and that is how your system calls work is that clear any doubt as of now okay and this is one system call you can try out others also you can create your own file since see how it works in the background this summary of this was that the operating system is the backbone of everything that your program does okay managing memory imagine CPU files how to open which device to interact with ensure that everything runs smoothly okay whatever looks like a simple program is going to have multiple operations which are happening in the background okay we don't even care about them memories allocated CPU time is allocated the output screen is being handled interaction with the disk is being handled okay so that is what your OS is doing because we cannot directly interact with the hardware okay so this brings us back to our question how does this program actually work this works with the help of the operating system which is allowing us to actually get memory from the disk allocated to the program this command is for the user only how the program runs and then this again is nothing but another request for a system call are asked the OS to print it on the screen and that is all okay any doubt as of now any doubt any questions short okay bless you I know okay so coming back to it let me show my iPads been again okay whatever the code was for this particular program I will share that also in the notes itself just a moment okay so this was more of an introductory session about OS now as we go on you must have noticed how every single line is itself a concept okay so in every class we have to gather we put up a question and how does this work and then related with how exactly OS handles it okay so for the most part of it always will have a lot of theory okay it will have a lot of theory but as we move on at the end of every class we have a small demo like in today's class we discuss all about the functions as a simple object that is all small demo how exactly does the OS work okay so in every class of the half together we maintain this that after theory we have a small demo program now this demo program is not very important for you for an exam perspective it is for you to observe what exactly we have learnt in the class okay then from the third lecture onwards you will have some numeric rules we will learn about concepts like CQ scheduling we will learn about paging all these things paging is again something like this but concepts like this we have some numeric rules and not just the numeric rules they will also have programs these will be Java programs to actually code the algorithm which you would use to complete these two things okay is that clear so if I come to the exam pattern the exam pattern will be emceicune from the theory there will be numeric rules and code will path as well okay and code will be the normal Java code that you have no simulation and simple Java code to execute the algorithms is that clear and honestly whatever programs that you have over here because they are based on the algorithms they will be no need to optimize it no need to think about new approaches rather they are like just simple steps which you have to follow and if you follow them you will be able to code them that is it okay so your paper will always comprise of these three things and nothing else okay once we are done with the course we will do a small project okay like we did the project in the end of the year you will very small project we did simulations and saw other business observations and this will build our own share okay please pay attention guys we have a small project building our own share and this will be 10% of your career okay so again coming back to the courses operating systems and conferences so I will see a lot of lectures on conferences also but after your meetings and exams mostly before conferences things are going to be a little more theoretical okay so please bear with that okay any other doubts makes certain answer will have the equal weightage and then 10% formal assignments assignments if you might see in your classes they will be in secure site okay in case after you class ends and you are not able to see assignments in your assignment dashboard please contact okay and then 10% will be your project okay any other doubt over here okay see whatever demos that will be doing most of the demos you will see will be on C or Zara okay because these demos are just for you to observe what is going on you are not for you to actually code in the exams okay but the programs that we have in the exam these will be certain and boredom okay and these boredom will be implemented by any language whatever you want okay at the end your seniors have always done the code in Java because whatever whatever test cases that we have that are in Java but I will try to make sure that I will have a lot more comfortable in the next C++ or Python we will have test cases for that okay but again these are not simulation we will not be what we have done right now rather they will be simple Java programs and nothing else any other doubt any other doubt yeah there are 20 MCQs it was MCQs will be from what functions we have simple maybe some Linux command what you have learned at the base about that okay anything else anything else okay again see OAS can get very complicated because again it is all sometimes it becomes very critical and every concept revolves around but other okay so whenever you feel like the class is going to fast or you are not able to understand the concept please reach out to me and tell me what didn't you understand rather than just giving me wage feed better and device is not able to understand this because one concept is interrelated so you have to exactly tell me what didn't you understand like if you see in today's class nothing was too technical it was more of a you to like see what on the surface OAS looks and tomorrow's class or about we have a class of Friday right whenever we happen first first first day so whenever we happen next class and next class is going to be a little more technical okay very learn about some about some terms which are very important and how exactly whatever we have seen today's class works okay so any questions any issues and again if in case you have missed attendance in the previous sessions of the PNS classes please mail me I will not be able to go through the WhatsApp messages so if you have missed the attendance is send me a proof that you were available that day and tag me in that okay not will not be a attendance anything that you came to the college or you put in some other class or any camera footage anything works your notes whatever it is so we are done with today's class let me just quickly check if you guys have the attendance then or not in case I will just mage you I will just mage you guys okay I'm marking the attendance now please stay back for a while just mage just give me a moment wait a minute wait a minute it has not been mage yet okay please as I roll call the attendance has not been mage date ashrajan akshat metal alayadetia alvena amartea amiraj amit ishruva amit ishruva amit ishruva amit ishruva amesahu amesahu amok amre amrit anan mohan ananta ananya ajaldas and raju winkert angan aniket ankit anketh angketh angketh angkustung angkustomer angkustomer angkustomer angkustung angkustung angkustomer angkustomer angkustomer anmol mahajan anmol sandhu anav anugre anus dharak anusatar anav sing aparna amrit sorry arpith arpith kakar arun misra aruvansh aruvansh arya kumar araman arin morthy arin nitten arin nitten arin nitten please raise your hand asrdulla arin nitten ashdip ashmeth ashtik atarve atarve sing atarve sing atarve sing charan charan kopi shetty charan kopi shetty chin me sharma darshan darshana dippak ambaad dippesh devansh agraval devansh sing devashish dhario dhabal mittal dhiraj dhiraj dhavi dhruv dhruv jadhar dhrum nikam dippan sarkar disha patel devansh devanshru divanshru raj dhrti edimani ek love you eshika faizan farhan azad garvit garvit sasdeva gautam patel guram dinkar karthikeyo hamsini hardik hamselaj harskumar harspalival harspalival harsalot harsh yadav harsita kimanshi harsita tatikar jadeep jatan kanish kasing kanaru irima kartik dikshith kavinarora kavin kavisha kushibansal kushibansal krischalakia krisch mandal krisch mandal krischakajoshi krischabhatia chithich amitush kumar bhihani kunal kunal bhihani kunal kunaav jeswal kushmikram kushmikram laksha pahuja lalith lalith laksmi magmashatisai malepatel malika suri manasgami manasmehni manav mariamansari adnanansari muni ralam muskan nagapujit namit namit namya sing ni tu ready niha nimeshade nimesha nippun nithin nual manos om niggam gaurapanchangam palati biwegnath pavitrapatel piush tangi kushkumar porder sham pranjal pratham prathik raj pravinsh Sharma prins ralamas 614 prins prins fortagya priyasing priyansh ragoesh raja raja poothom tananjay rasees rajensipatel ridhima ridhima rathuraj raja raja raja rohesh Sharma rujul sambasim naidu samruddhi sanjyot sanskar sanskar sari kamisra sari ka sarthak suri sarthak sarvagya sarvikas sarvakumar sejal sharya shivam shodri shivangi agrawal shreya shreya sharma shreya shodri sadeesh koel samarani etladevi soha misra soha ams sohangi sohangi soha ams saamegutta suraj surya tarun sae tarun sae tejas tarun trishandas ujul veis puarthi webhavagrawal webhav Singh webhav Tiwari with us weashnavi vashu Sharma Venkita Ramredi Vishvanath Viveksaraath Bhiyom Gupta, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, pahuja, yes, kumar, lohit, lohit, yuvrasing, zoheb you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you