Cool. So, we have started the session on the skill platform as well. So, today we are going to look into the application of probability and probability distributions in solving actual data analytics business case studies. I hope the basics of the probability distribution was covered in your previous semester, right? The probability is aware of the basic concept of probability. Then tell me what is probability? Once, let me switch this. Tell me. What do you understand by probability? If I have to ask you to explain probability in simple terms, how will you do that? Anyone? What is probability? Okay. So chances of occurrence of an event, right? Of any event. Cool. So, let us look at some of the basic concepts first. So what do you understand by the word experiment in probability sense? So an experiment is any action or process that generates outcomes? Okay. Sorry, you sure? Yeah. So an experiment is nothing but an action that generates an outcome. That generates an outcome. For example, tossing a coin is an experiment, why? Because it generates an outcome either heads or attains. So example could be tossing a coin, rolling a die or anything, right? Anything, any action that can produce an outcome. Next an outcome, an outcome is nothing but a single result of an experiment. For example, such in scoring 100 runs in a specific match is one possible outcome. And sample space, sample space is basically the set of all possible outcomes. Example being in such in zodiac career, the sample space might include scoring all possible runs that one could achieve like 1 to 200 plus. So that's some basic concepts of probability. I hope everybody is aware of these. Any doubts on the confusions in this? Pretty basic concept, right? You must have studied in school as well. So the goal of today's class is to kind of analyze a data set and try to answer certain questions with the help of probability distribution. So we're going to use the data set that is such in the node course, ODI cricket career. So we'll be analyzing a data set containing the ODI cricket stats of such in one of the data sticketers. So the data set provides detailed performance metrics across 360 matches. So we have data points from 360 matches. And we plan to get insights into his performance patterns, match outcomes, opposition and mental analysis. Some of the key business objectives that we are trying to analyze is understanding particular practice. So how such performance influence nationalize it? Performance insights and individual insights in such a piece like this for bringing to contributions. So this is the way we use for making analysis to our interesting scenarios. Because how often the century or age will be? For example, how often when such in schools essentially India wins a match? The study conversation, show a section in fact and then systems in ODI cricket, put in the event size. I think why are we doing this? Any thoughts? Who could benefit from this? Like which type of organization could do this? Why should we do this? Any thoughts? How can people make money out of this analysis? Where to invest in what sense? Like betting? But who would do this? Who would do this? Any thoughts? Who would do this? Such an interesting example, you can take any cricketer for that matter. Sorry? Trading. Okay, betting, pick up a government, pick up a used case. What else? Who else? Who is a more private intelligence member of this data? Yes, IPL teams, right? PCC, IE and cricket teams, IPL teams, they could analyze the winning patterns, analyze it, in fact they do. They do analyze their player's at a six-club and analytics for their player's performance and try to figure out who could be the best possible 11, which player to pick up in the next auction, who could make them win matches, so and so forth. Similarly, this can be the same, and you can be a player to any school for them to be involved in. Or any, any, any, even NBA, these people do these kind of analysis to figure out which type of players should we be going ahead with, which type of teams we should be playing with. So, this is a very important use case, usually comes under the branches, sports analytics. So is that clear? Does it make sense to everyone? Cool. So we are going to import the data from our Google Drive and the data, its name is Sachin ODI.CS. We'll let me share this notebook with you also. So here's the notebook. Cool. So first things first, I'm importing all the necessary, the library, the file, the file, the data, the DCC function, and then doing a dot head to look at the first few rows of the data. So, what are the problems I see? I see that is not out minutes, BF, okay, fours, sixes, SR probably could be stiprated, okay, who was the opposition? The first innings or second innings? Ground date, the consequence of the match, who won the match? Did India won or not? Was there a century or not? Cool. So, not out is probably a binary variable, it has two antichristi rules. He was not out, it was batting the end. Any questions on the dataset? Any questions? Any questions anyone? Cool. The next we're looking at the info. This tells me the column name, the nominal count, and the data type of each. Value, it looks like we have all the values, there's no null value. Now we'll come to the basic probability terminology in concepts, I think we've discussed this here. Now this is a practical application. So, we saw what is sample space, right? The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes for the test delivery. For sample to be able to sample, we find all possible values, as you can see. Now how can we implement this using finders? So, we want to find out the sample space that is all possible scores we made in his own career. So, what we are doing, we're taking the data frame, we're using the run's column, we saw that there are run's column, right? And then, I'm doing a dot unique, dot unique will give me all unique values of all the possible ones that he has scored. And this is nothing but my sample space. So, this is how we can visualize it, and I can see that there is 122 different scores that he has made for this study here. So, how are we finding the sample space using the dot unique function? Is that clear? Any questions in this? Cool. So, here's a business context. A sports analytic company wants to understand the players scoring patterns. To inform commentary, performance predictions and fan engagement strategies. Bannedilizing the full range of possible scores of a legendary player like Sachin. As I've reviewed in ODI, is the company can design statistical models to assess consistency, risk of dismissal or likelihood of big scores and features in areas. So, they want to predict future outcomes, taking Sachin as a proxy. So, next, we're going to look into events. So, let's quickly discuss the basics. What is a mutually exclusive event? First of all, what is an event? What is an event, folks? What is an event? Accurrence or happening of anything, right? Accurrence of anything. In this case, it could be Sachin's playing, Sachin scoring, things like that. It's technically the subset of the sample space. It contains one or more outcomes. Possibly event, Sachin scores more than a random answer a match, Sachin scores zero runs, Sachin plays a match, Sachin doesn't play a match, things like that. These could be events. Now, we're going to look into types of events. What is a mutually exclusive event? Sorry? Yes, events, two events that cannot occur parallel, you cannot occur at the same time. Yeah, any questions? Can anyone give me an example of two mutually exclusive events in this context? Yes, Sachin scoring a century and Sachin scoring a getting out for a doctor. Event A could be Sachin scoring a hundred. Event B could be Sachin scoring zero. These two events cannot happen simultaneously, right? So, these two are mutually exclusive. Second is joint events. What do you understand by joint events, folks? Can you even tell me? What are joint events? It's a simple opposite of mutually exclusive events that can happen simultaneously. Example can be Sachin scores more than fifty runs. And India one will match the one by idea. These two can happen simultaneously, right? So, events that can happen simultaneously. Then next is independent events. Events where the occurrence of one does not affect the other. For example, Sachin performance and the mental conditions. How did Sachin perform? Can we kind of how was the weather like it was a cloudy it was whatever, right? So, these can be independent events which occurrence of one does not affect the occurrence of the another. The last is exhaustive event. It covers all possible outcomes in the sample space. Basically all possible events that can happen like in the entirety of the world, right? Sachin scores as a fifty runs, Sachin scores 50 or more runs. So, together these two events can be dropped in. Can they be any of the same? Can they be any of the three candidates and the score is 50 or more runs, right? Can there be any third scenario? So, these two events collectively are called exhaustive because they cover all possible scenarios. Is that clear? Hey, doubt anyone? Cool. Next, we want to understand these type of events to help identify high impact performance scenarios, predictive models and enhancing the visual. So, we are telling for fan engagement like you see charts and everything on your screens during the post match analysis or pre match analysis or even during the middle of the over. If you are following if you are following cricket type of things like that, they show a lot of probability based scenarios. So, first thing that we are going to implement is visualizing events with set of issues. First is in the section. Intersection means where both of the events are kind of happening at the same time. For example, matches where Sachin scored more than 50 runs and India won. Can you even tell me how will we implement this? As a first, if you look at the example, mathematically can you tell me how to represent this? Intersection, but how? If this is the event, matches scored where Sachin scored more than 50 runs and India won. How will you represent this in terms of probability? Events probability and intersection. How will you represent that? How many events are happening here? So, can it take let's say my event a as Sachin scoring more than 50 and event bb, India win and now can you tell me how will you represent in terms of probability? Probability of this entire event happening? Can you even tell me how will you represent in probability notation? As a what type of event today? Like what type of set operation are we doing here? Intersection. So, can we not say that we want to find p of a and or intersection b? Yes or no? Now, if I have to expand how will I do that? Why probability of a and probability of b? Yes, very good. Because, as I say if these were not independent events then what would you have done? Sorry? Divide by probability of what? If these were not independent events then what would have been the representation? Come again probability of a but a and b is already a union b and then is this correct? Then what would have been the character representation? Probability of a multiplied by probability of b given a and then divided by probability of p. Is this correct? So, you would have tackled this using base theorem. So, p a given b is defined as p of a intersection b divided by p of b and p of a intersection b. You just cross multiply this. Would have been p b multiplied by p a given b. Is that clear? Is this clear? So, you could have done using base theorem will come to that. We will come to that. But for now the events are independent. The events are independent. So, we can simply say that p of a intersection b is nothing but p of a multiplied by p of b. Because events are independent. So, now tell me how will you find the p of a and p of b using the data? Like you are using pointers how will you find p of a and p of b? Anyone has any thoughts? How will we find probability of such in scoring more than 50? As a what is the formula for finding probability? If I want to find a probability of event a what is the formula? Please be little out. Yes, favorable outcomes divided by total outcomes. So, what is the favorable outcome here? What is the favorable outcome here? Sachin scoring more than 50. Sachin scoring more than 50. And what are the total number of outcomes? All possible scores basically. Now, let us see how will we implement using pandas? So, first thing I am defining event a as scores greater than 50. So, how am I doing how am I doing this? I am getting the condition of the data, the analysis greater than 50 and only getting those data points. And event b is where Sachin basically the one is true. One means India wins. So, this is how we are defining the events. And then we are kind of taking the intersection. So, how are we doing this? We are merging the two using an inner join. What is this mean? This means that both the conditions are actually true. We are going to take only those data points. Where both the data points both the conditions are actually true because of the inner join. Only the common rows will come. So, this is the data. This is the exact data where basically Sachin scored more than 50 and India actually won. Is that clear? Is there any doubt in this? Is there any doubt in this? Any questions in this anyone? Does it make sense? Cool. Next. Assam. If I have to kind of find the probability, this is the intersection. If I have to do dot shape 0. So, this is giving me all those rows where these two events are happening simultaneously. India won and Sachin scored more than 50. So, this is what? This is your favorable outcomes. Total outcomes would be nothing but Sachin data dot shape 0. This will be your total outcomes, all possible scenarios. Now, you simply divide these two. If I divide these two. So, 20% of the cases were Sachin scored more than 50 runs and India actually won. Right? So, what does this tell us about Sachin? So, I have been scoring higher score. We need not necessarily be the idea of the win. In fact, in most of the cases, it belongs to. Is that clear? Any doubts in this anyone? Cool. Now, we are going to look at union. Union is a case where either of the events happens. If there are two or three events, either of the event occurs, then that is a case of union. So, Sachin scored more than 50 runs or India actually won. So, any of the two events here instead of merge, I am doing a concat. Why am I doing a concat? Why a concat and why not a merge or why not a join? Why? What is a concat function? What does concat function do? Sorry. Be a little louder. What does a concat function do? See, if I have two data frames, let's say this is data frame A with all the columns, and then this is data frame B with the exact same columns, we just stack them on top of each other. So, basically, we are considering both the columns, both the data frame A and B. So, that's why it is considered a case of union, right? Where both A is happening or B is happening, we are considering the both. Right? So, that is why we are doing a concatenation and doing a drop the case in case any duplicate events occurred, like that is in both the events. We are going to drop that. So, this is the case where Sachin scored more than 50 runs or India actually won. Is that clear? Is the union of patience here how are you going to implement continuity by last? Yes or no? Any questions, anyone? Cool. So, this is how you are going to implement union. Next, complement. That's how what is complement of A? A complement of event A? Basically, one might be appropriate, yes. Matches may have been first but nothing. So, matches where Sachin did not score a 50, right? So, how can you implement that? Just implement the opposite condition. Right? Right? So, there is a signal of not a century. So, it's a complement of what? Complement of Sachin's scoring 100. Yes or no? So, this is the data where Sachin actually did not score a century. Is that clear? Achal, can there be an alternative way to get this exact same result? Look at the data, can anyone tell me? Can I change this condition to something? I have some student's given it right? Does there represent a column that represents 100 runs? Yes. If I had done something like this, century equal to falls, then also I should have received the same result. Is that clear? So, there can be more than one way to kind of achieve something, right? Cool. So, next we are going to look at the probability rules, addition to multiplication and then base theorem. So, the context that we are going to follow is a cricket analytics team. Wants to study matchless where Sachin and Dilkut did not achieve a milestone. That's as scoring a century. To understand the patterns in games very performed below peak levels, analyze factors that might have influenced lower scores, and provide insights for performance improvement strategies, commentate in particular. So, we want to find, we want to understand the fundamental rules of probability and help us compute likelihood of events systematically. First is addition rule. You want to calculate the probability of either one limit or another limit, so that is the union of events. Let's quickly revise this. So, probability of A union B is actually given by P of A plus P of B minus P of A intersection B. So, what is this called? This called the union. These are the individual or marginal probabilities also called. And these are your intersection events. Any doubts in this? I hope this is clear to everyone, right? So, next we are going to see how are we going to implement this? So, first is the addition rule. An example that we are going to look at is what is the probability? That's something scored more than 50 runs, event A or India won the match. One way could have been, we could have simply done the dot shape 0 divided by a dot shape 0 of the total. Alternative can be where we are applying this formal. So, first we are finding the total matches, which is the length of the second data. You see, if we total number of goals, I believe it was 360. Event A, such as scoring more than 50, even B where India won the match. Intersection is merge of both. I think we saw this earlier also. Merge of event A, merge of the plane with the initial joint. Next we are finding the individual probabilities. Probability A is length of event A divided by total matches. Probability B is length of event B divided by total matches. And finally, intersection is length of intersection divided by total matches. Lastly, we are applying the formula, P A plus P B minus P intersection A and this section B. And this is going to give us the final results of P A union B. Is this clear? Any doubts in this, folks? Any questions in this? Any doubts in this? Because next P A multiplied by B, you are going to implement. Any doubts in this, folks? Achach, we discussed this right. P A intersection B was P A into B, right? Because of them being independent. If I ask you, yeah, just using this code, how will you implement P A intersection B? I don't want to use this. I don't want to use this. I directly want to calculate this. How will you do that? Or basically I am asking what can be the alternative method to calculate P A intersection B? Can anyone tell me? How can I implement P A intersection B without using a lot of formula? Anyone? Anyone? Any thoughts, anyone? What is the formula for P A intersection B? No, we just discussed. In case of independent events, what is P A intersection B? So how can I implement this? Exactly. I have the P A, I have the P B. I can just multiply the two. That also will do the job. Is that clear? Any doubts, any confusion in this? This is the type of questions you will find in your quiz as a study of events. When you will have to implement the whole problem, the functions. Cool. Next, in case of a scenario where we are not going to have independent events, we are going to use the base rule or you can say dependent use. The multiplication rule calculates the probability of both events happening together. The formula for that as we discussed, P A intersection B is nothing but P A multiplied by P, B given in. As I can anyone derive this for independent events, P A into P B. Can anyone derive this? Can anyone derive this? Does anybody know how to how to be reach this result? Does anyone know? You were just told and you accepted the fact that this is true. How did we reach this result? Nobody asked this question how? When this was being taught? Just by looking, I mean think logically, you will reach this result, just think logically. Think logically. Exactly. So, see look at this term, P B given A. What does this mean? Probability of occurrence of B given that A has occurred. Now you tell me, we just discussed that B and A are independent, that occurrence of A does not impact the occurrence of B. So, would it matter if A has occurred or not? Why? Because B and A are independent, they do not care about each other. So, this is effectively the same as P of B. So, should A occur or not occur, P B of A is equal to P of B. Is this clear? Any doubts, any confusion in this? Cool. But anyway, in case it is not a independent event or it is a dependent event, then we will have to use the same multiplication rule. So, an example, what is the probability that certain scored more than 50 runs and India won the match? The probability of India winning depends on whether such in scores more than 50 or not. So, we cannot directly compute the joint probability without knowing P B given it. So, we are going to find each of the independent individual events. So, first is P of A, I think it is the same as the list where such is more than P. Now, we will find a conditional relation, the conditional coordinate, P B given A. What is the condition that such in a scored more than 50? Right? And then what is P B given A? From this conditional data, India has to win the match. Within this conditional data, India has to win the match. So, we are adding one more condition, but not on the original data, but on this conditional data, where such in is actually scored more than 50. What is the condition that I am putting? That the win should be equal to true, that means India should actually win. And then taking simply the length of it and then dividing by the length of A. So, this gives us P B given it. Right? P B given it. And then we are simply multiplying it with the help of the multiplication rule. So, you see probability of, I think we discussed this earlier also, that 20% of the cases in the actual events when that is scored more than 50 runs. Is this clear to everyone? Any doubt, any questions? Let's take a 5 minute break. It's 311. Let's come back by 316. And then we will continue the concept of marginal probability, joint probability, and then base rule. Let's take a 5 minute break and then come back in the meantime, if anyone has any doubts and questions, please feel free to ask. You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You You