you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you So as for now, what we have learned, why do we even need concurrency? We needed concurrency because multiple threads were running together. OS was deciding when to run which thread we did not have any control over it. Plus all the threads were sharing the resources. Because of which, I can say we need synchronization so that everything runs well altogether. Now what all things were being shared, variables, queues, files, data ways, pretty much everything which you could think of was being shared by the threads. And that is why this was becoming very critical to safeguard the shared data because the entire application is working on that. Now what could go wrong? What could lead to this problem in concurrency? Because of race condition amongst the thread, we could get wrong output. Because there was data. Can you please sonnet on? So there could be data corruption because of lost updates. Can someone please sonnet on? We have seen that in the previous class how they could be lost updates because of race condition. Threads were not able to write the data properly. And that is why data was being corrupted and people we could say that you were not getting the right answer. In today's class, we will see at how all this thing can also lead to deadlock. How sharing data can lead to deadlock and how deadlock leads to starvation. So this is what we have discussed till now. So what is our aim? Is our aim to remove multi-fading? Absolutely not. It is amazing. We just need to control how to perform the multi-fading to get the right answer. Now we will be moving on to some famous problems. Before that, please go through the first quiz and answer. The main goal of the condition is to control the shared access of data. Now we will move to some famous problems, the sinking problems. Now why are these important? Because they represent real world situations where multi-fading or process sharing limited resources can cause problems. And from this you can understand how to fix those problems. Like couple of these you must have seen in the assignment also like the FUBAR, S2O problem. And this problem, these three were given in the assignment if we have checked it out. Brahan, start talking. And today's class, we will see the producer consume a problem, the reader is writer problem and the sleeping Baba problem. One more problem is the cigarette smokers problem. I will give you a read up for this. Then we will move on to deadlocks and we will see a problem of dining philosopher. And then we will see an algorithm which is the bankers algorithm which helps us resolve deadlock. Okay. But this is going to be the actual content. So having that said, let us move on to the producer consumer problem. It's a very famous concurrency problem and it's very easy to understand also. In this what we say that there are only two threads working. One is known as the producer thread and the other one is known as the consumer thread. Okay. So what is the job of producer? Producer is going to create items and add it into a shared buffer. Shared buffer here is a shared memory or the shared queue from where everybody can access data. Next you have the consumer thread consumer thread only does one task. It removes items from the buffer and then uses it. Okay. So what is the important point over here? It has some rules that both producer and consumer are working on the shared buffer. This buffer is going to have a limited capacity and there will be three rules. The producer must wait if the buffer is full because if the buffer is full, the consumer has not consumed anything. And hence the producer should not produce any item. Similarly consumer must wait if the buffer is empty because if the buffer is empty, there is nothing there for the consumer to consume and the producer has not done its job. And the last thing is that only one of these threads can work at one time. Okay. These are the rules given. Okay. Now in order to ensure that this situation is being handled well, we will need three CMA force. One is the empty CMA force. Next is the full CMA force and then we have the mutex CMA force. Each of them will have a specific job in this particular problem. Okay. Let us first understand the flow. Or even before the flow, let us write the CMA force. So if I talk about CMA force empty, what do you think is CMA force empty going to tell you? What is this CMA force empty going to tell you? It basically tells you how many empty slots are there. You can write this CMA force counts empty slots in the buffer. So when I am starting out and I have not given any permit to any of the producer or the consumer have done nothing in the beginning how many empty slots will be available? Tell me how many empty slots will be available? If the buffer is of a certain size and I am saying that buffer needs to be filled, nobody has filled anything in the buffer then how many empty slots are available at the moment? The buffer size itself. Now think about it. In CMA force, what do we denote? The permits here, what does the permit denote? The permit is to either pick up an item from the slot or fill an item in the slot. So when I am trying to fill the item, I am saying I need permit to fill the item. How many permits can I have in the beginning equal to the buffer size? Okay. What about the next CMA force? The next CMA force which we have is going to be the full CMA force. Okay. Now what will be the size of full CMA force when we are beginning? Zero? Why? Because what does full CMA force denote? Correct. I can say it counts the filled slots. Okay. It counts the filled slots. So when I am starting out, none of the slots are filled and hence full CMA force is zero. And then at last we will have one more CMA force which is called a mutex CMA force. Okay. You can name it whatever you want to. This is a traditional way of naming it. Now mutex CMA force ensures that only one thread can enter at a time and hence its job is to protect the shared resource. Okay. The job is to protect the shared resource. So how many threads I want to enter at a moment? One thread which means I will allow only one permit. Is that clear? Is the CMA force structure clear? So as of now in the producer consumer, when I have only two threads working on a shared buffer, we will need three CMA force. Let us see the job of ECMA force. mutex is very clearly saying that at one time only one thread can enter and do its job either producer or consumer. Next you have empty empty notes a number of slots that are remaining in the buffer to be filled. Whereas fully notes how many have been filled. Okay. And that is it. Is that clear? Okay. People at the back I can hear you talking. Okay. So what is going to be the flow? How will you try to put locks over here? Think about it. What is the producer flow? Producer wants to check if there is empty space. If there is empty space, it will lock the buffer. Then it will add item to the buffer. Once item addition is done, you can unlock the buffer. And after that you can signal the consumer that now buffer is full. Take items from it. Then consumer can come in check if the buffer is full. If buffer is full, it will lock the buffer. Remove the item. Unlock the buffer and then signal that now my buffer is empty. This is what you want to achieve. Is that clear? This is a very basic order where once it is empty or full only then the other thread is signaled. Depending on the problem, you can change your locking system. But this is the very basic locking system. Okay. So we'll think about the producer first. Now producer wants to add an item and before adding producer must check if there is empty space in the buffer. Now which Cima4 is telling you about empty spaces? The empty Cima4. So you are trying to take permission from the empty Cima4. So you say empty dot acquire. Now if the empty does have permits available, it means that slots are empty. Go ahead take a slot. Okay. After that you will do mutex dot acquire because it might be possible that the slots are available. But the other thread is working on it. So you have to acquire two permits. First is from empty checking if slots are empty. Second is from the mutex denoting that the consumer is not working on it. The consumer is not working only I am going to work. Okay. After this, once you have acquired mutex, you can add item in the buffer. Buffer is any shared resource that you have. After which adding the buffer. Adding item to the buffer, you will release the permission back to the mutex saying now I am done. Consumer can start its job. Next full dot release will say that now I have made one or multiple other slots full. Is that clear? This is going to be the locking sequence for producer. Okay. If you if you change the locking system of producer, it will not work. Okay. Any problem in this. Okay. Next see the consumer side. Now what does the consumer do before consuming it will check is permission available in the full Cima4. That are the slots full because only then I can pick up items. So I say full dot acquire. If I get permission from here, you will say mutex dot acquire acquiring the shared buffer. We wait just rush please stop talking. Then you will remove the item from the buffer. Once you have removed it done your job, you will release the mutex again for producer to go in and produce more things. And then release one to empty saying that now once lot is empty again. Okay. This is the right sequencing of producer and consumer. Any doubt at this point? Okay. Please remember you cannot swap the locks. I can still see you guys. What's up? Why you talking? Yes. Discussing. You discuss while laughing. No right. Please be a little quieter. If you want to discuss please discuss but don't disturb the class. Moving on. Why not the opposite? Why am I not saying that full is the mutex for producer and empty is the mutex for consumer? Because in many of the problems, what is producer doing? Is filling up the entire buffer that I have so that you can consume items in a complete stream. And that is why we want producer to go ahead check the empty slots and start filling up. Okay. This is how the locking system will work. Now what kind of problems you can get in the exam? Either you can get very small numericals that initially you will be given the buffer size. And these steps will be mentioned. Now these steps can be mentioned like lines that producer is producing as you will see in the next numerical or the locking system can be given to you. After performing the locking system, how many empty spaces are left? How many full spaces are left? Okay. That is what you have to answer in this. Any doubt in producer consumer? Okay. In more thing and you will be writing the code for this in case it comes as a coding problem. You can also use a choir instead of a choir, you can use a weight and you can use signal also. Okay. So up till now we have used a choir whenever we want to ask for a permit or wait for a permit and release is going to give a permit. What does a weight do? A weight weights for a signal from the producer. Okay. At once producer says that I am done. I am signaling you then the consumer says that okay. Now I can start my work. Okay. That is how you can use a weight and signal and you can use it in all the concurrency problems. However, whatever problems have been given to you in the assignments are pretty solvable by a choir and release. Any doubt in this? Any doubt? Okay. If not answer the next couple of quizzes and then we will see a small numerical problem. Please answer. Okay. MT dot a choir is always checking for the empty slots. Okay. Next one. Okay. Okay. The mutex cema 4 is simple, mutual exclusion. It just ensures that in the shared buffer only one thread can enter at a time. That's all. Okay. Moving on to the numerical problem. This is one way in which your exam might come that the producer consumer cema 4 values are given below. The buffer capacity is 5 initially. MT slots are 5. MT is equal to 5. Full is equal to 0. What are the operations now? Producer produces three items. Consumer consumes one item. Producer produces two items. Then consumer consumes three items. After all these steps have happened, what are the final values of MT and full cema 4? This is one kind of question which you might receive in the numerical section. So pretty easy to tell me what is going to be the final answer. What is the value of MT? What is the value of full after performing the operations given here? No piosh. Think about it. Initially MT was 5 and full was 0. Now I am saying produce three items. If I produce three items, what happens to MT? I produce items and filled it in the slot. How many are MT now? Two are MT. What about full? Three are full. Okay. Boomi that is correct. Pioh said the intermediate answer is not the final answer. Okay. Then consumer removes one item. If consumer removes the item, I can say now full slots are only two and MT slots are three. Are they correct? Okay. Then add step three again produces two items. Okay. So if I produce two items, this is four and now MT slot is only one. And then again at last, when consumer consumes three items, the MT slots will increase. It will be four and the full slots will be one. So finally, MT slots are four. Final full is going to be one. This is how the kind of questions will be solved. Okay. Generally they will ask you the last state in this one. Okay. So as of now we have given entire statements. It can also come in the locking pattern as well. Okay. Any doubt as of now? Any question? Okay. Great. We will solve some more numericist towards the end of the class. So then let us move on to the next problem. Okay. Next problem is a very common problem, which you can see in the world. Okay. You can think of a Google Doc while we are trying to discuss this. This is known as the reader's writers problem in this. There is one single shared file, which can be a database or a normal doc file or any other resource. Okay. They are two threads. One is reader thread. One is writer thread. Okay. And the rules are going to be different for each. If you must have notice rules in producer consumer were pretty much the same. That they can acquire at one time and do their job. Okay. But here the rules will be different. Now what is the reader thread doing? Reader can only read data. Okay. And while it is reading, it does not change any data. Whereas writer is going to write data, which means it can modify data. It changes it. Okay. So what are the rules? Multiple readers can read together as they don't modify anything. Writer is changing, which means that only one writer can write at a time. Whereas the reader writer cannot access the data together because there will be a race condition or loss update in case they access it together. Is that clear? Okay. So you can imagine a Google Doc multiple people are reading the document at the same time. Okay. And reading is safe until they change the document. But the moment someone is editing the document, we must control the access. If one person is writing, the others should shift to the reading mode. And even if they are trying to write while someone else is writing, we are going to ask them to not write in the document. Okay. That is what's going to happen. If you don't allow that, then data will be inconsistent. Okay. So that is the entire reader writer problem. So what is this problem teaching us? But whenever we have a shared resource and we want data to be safe, allow reading at multiple threads, but do not allow writing with multiple threads. Is that clear? Okay. Also one more thing starvation can happen if multiple readers just keep on coming again and again. Because of multiple readers are coming, we are always going to allow them and the writer will keep on waiting and they will never get a chance. Okay. So you should ensure fairness while applying this particular problem. Okay. Is that clear? Everyone? Simple problem. You will not get any numerical from this. You can be asked simple theory questions from this. So the rules of the reader writer problem. Okay. Please answer the next quiz thinking about the access we should be allowed. Okay. Here again, see only one writer is allowed at the moment. Hence multiple writers are writer with writer cannot be allowed reader with writer can also not be allowed. It will lead to inconsistent data. You can only allow reader with reader. Okay. That is the only access which can be allowed at this point. Okay. Now. So this problem just teaches about the different kind of another different kind of just two threads which are trying to work on a shared resource. That's it. Okay. Now you know very well that whenever the threads don't get the critical section or don't get the CPU, they are supposed to wait. Now, we must also consider that the waiting queue cannot be unlimited. Right. If you keep on putting every single thread in the waiting queue, the waiting queue is technically unlimited. But should you apply that in a real life system? No, that can also lead to starvation. So this brings us to the next problem which is known as the sleeping barbell problem. Okay. Again, here we are going to manage limited waiting space and thread signaling. Now you all know up until now in whatever scenario we have taught, we were getting very regular work. We were getting multiple threads. Okay. Multiple threads denote work over here and they were coming one after the other. But in real life system, what can happen that you might get a regular work. Sometimes they can be multiple threads showing up. Sometimes they can be single thread showing up or sometimes they can be zero thread showing up. Okay. So that is the problem which we are trying to solve over here. Okay. So now imagine a barber shop. You have a barber. You have one barber share and there are waiting chairs also and then you have multiple customers. Okay. Now the barber is going to cut the hairs only when the customers are available. If no customers available, then barber can simply go to sleep. Okay. Now whenever a customer arrives, what can happen? They are multiple things which can happen. So if the customer arrives, they can check with the barber. If the barber is asleep, they are going to wake the barber up saying that I am signaling the thread to wake up and take up the task. If the barber is busy, then they are going to wait in the chair. But what if the barber is busy and there is no free chair available in that case, you will simply leave the shop. This allows you to handle unlimited waiting space. Is that clear as of now? So here barber is the thread and the customers are the work which is arriving and here you can clearly see that this is nothing but I can say are irregular problem where the threads or the work keep showing up at different different times. Is that clear? So the threads may need to wait for an event to actually happen. If you have any thread which is sleeping in the background, you can wake that thread up. Okay. Buy some other thread signaling it that now you need to come into picture and start working. You also have to handle the limited waiting spaces by asking the processes to leave if you don't have enough space. Okay. So sinking or concurrency is not about just locking the data. It is also about coordinating how to manage the waiting space. From this also you will not get any numerical. Rather you will get simple theory questions. Is this clear everyone? Okay. So this problem is teaching you about waiting, waking up by signaling and controlling the limited resources which you have. That is all. Okay. So this brings us to a more important topic which is deadlock. Now what is exactly deadlock when does that happen? Okay. Anyways, we will move to deadlock. Okay. So most of the problems which we have seen so far was happening because of controlling the thread order or grouping them together or protecting the shared data. But all of them was pretty manageable with the help of a locking system. Now we are moving on to a more dangerous problem. Okay. Here the threads are not going to produce a wrong output which you guys can fix. Rather they will lead to the system stopping forever and that stopping of the system is known as a deadlock in deadlock threads are going to wait forever and nobody can move forward. Okay. No thread can continue because of a couple of conditions. Now what happens is that you know very well that threads wait for resources. What if you don't allow them the resources they are going to go in the waiting state. No process can wait and the system looks frozen to you. Right. This is what has happened. Now imagine one thread needs two resources resource a and resource B. As these resources are objects I can say they have their own locks. So what if thread a goes or thread one goes and it is holding the resource a by locking it and it also wants a resource B which has lock B. So as of now thread one is holding lock a and there is another thread thread to which is holding lock B which is wanted by thread one. And now thread two is saying I already possess the lock B. I also want resource a and hence I want the lock a. So what is happening? The threads are holding some resources and they want some other resources because of which you see a cycle has been formed thread one waits for lock B. Lock B is held by thread to thread to wait for lock a which is again held by thread one. So in such a situation where a cycle is formed nobody is able to continue. Right. Nobody is releasing the lock and because of this the eventual execution is stuck at a point and this is known as deadlock. Is this clear everyone? Okay. There are four conditions of deadlock will move to that but as of now I hope it's clear one of the conditions you can see right here is a circular wait. Wherever you find a cycle in the resource allocation and holding you will say that a deadlock has occurred. Second thing is no preemption they are not releasing their resource they are not releasing their object. Okay. So these are the two conditions which we have discussed as of now based on this please answer the next question and then we will do a short numerical. Okay. Here you could see the same problem as this diagram that the threads are holding the locks and wanting some other locks which leads to circular way. Okay. So if I give you a table in which processes are given and resources are given how will you find that that particular process order is a deadlock or not. Okay. Let us see that this kind of question you can also get in your exams. Okay. So suppose there are four threads you are given data of the resources that they are holding and the resources that they are waiting for try to create a cycle or try to create a graph and check if it is ending up in a cycle. If it does have a cycle I can say that a deadlock has occurred. Okay. So try to make this waiting chain with the help of the table. See. T1 is holding R1 is waiting for R2 is there any other thread in the table which is holding R2 yes there is T2 which is holding R2 at the moment as it is holding R2 I can say T1 cannot finish until T2 is going to be a deadlock. T2 is going to finish so the waiting chain says that T1 is waiting for T2 to finish now for T2 to finish what do you need for T2 you need R2 which is available with it you need R3 for which it is waiting. Is there any other thread in our table which already has R3 yes T3 possesses R3 which means for T2 to complete T3 needs to be completed. Same process for T3 also it is holding R3 waiting for R4 who holds R4 T4 is going to hold R4. After now everything is fine if T4 executes then everybody else is going to execute but at this moment you can see that T4 is holding R4 but it is waiting for R1 and with whom is R1 line with T1 which means that T4 cannot complete until T1 is going to be completed. So here you can clearly see that there is a cycle yes there is a cycle as there is a cycle there is going to be a deadlock is that clear. Now for this for any kind of deadlock detection you can simply create a graph if the graph has any kind of cycle amongst any process it is not compulsory that everything has to be in a cycle only. Even if 2 to 3 threads are in a cycle you are I can say your diagram is going to have a deadlock is that clear everyone. We will do a couple of more numericals on the same basis as of now the condition is known as circular weight. Now as we have discussed about circular weight let us see some more conditions of deadlock. Now here please remember deadlock will occur when all the 4 conditions are happening simultaneously. The first condition is known as a mutual exclusion in mutual exclusion as per now what we have seen it is a good thing that one resource is being taken care of or being held by one single thread multiple threads cannot enter and it was helping us in maintaining the order. But right now if one resource is available with one thread it cannot be shared with the other thread and hence other threads cannot proceed. Similarly the second condition is hold and wait hold and wait means your thread needs multiple resources some of those resources it is holding on to some of the other resources it is waiting for. And maybe those other resources are locked with some other thread and the third condition is no preemption that up until my task with the particular thread is completed the resource cannot be forcefully taken away from a thread. This is what is no preemption and next is circular weight which you have just seen threads waiting for other threads to complete. Now how will you see this in your code. So first of all in order to say that one resource is being held I can say this resource is nothing but an object. Suppose resource one is an object how will you lock this by writing synchronized. So we write synchronized over here synchronized resource one. Now can I say that once a thread has written synchronized resource one only one thread can enter at a time. So here I can say only one thread can enter okay this shows mutual exclusion and next I can say after the job is complete I will release the lock okay and this is no preemption okay this is what you write normally okay now how to represent hold and wait. Now imagine that instead of acquiring one single lock I go ahead and have one more lock okay something like this okay this is resource two okay so as of now what is happening even if I have the thread has entered here synchronized resource one now at the moment it is holding resource one. But by the time it comes to resource two it might be possible that some other thread has already acquired it so I can say even if I am holding the resource one I might be waiting for resource two now it is a might be condition it is not always true. Is that clear everyone how can you figure out these conditions okay that is how the code will be written okay now I'll show you one more thing. Imagine that there are two threads first thread has used this locking mechanism it locks resource one and it locks resource two then there is another thread and this another thread is locking the system in a different way this is T1 this is T2 okay now if I change the ordering what will happen remember T1 and T2 are running simultaneously with the same speed now at this condition tell me will a deadlock occur or not look at the locking mechanism and tell me will a deadlock occur or not think about it and tell me see T1 is first locking resource one and the second step it is locking resource two there is a simultaneous thread which first locks resource two and then moves on to resource one so what can happen over here absolutely right there will be circular weight and this will lead to deadlock okay why because again see T1 has gone ahead and now it is going to be a deadlock. Okay why because again see T1 has gone ahead and now it is holding the resource one and T2 has gone ahead and now it is holding R2 done in the next step I can say I am waiting for R2 and here in T2 I am waiting for R1 correct. So the previous circle that I made of all the threads and the weight cycle that is what we are making over here okay so remember for avoiding deadlock you need to order the locks properly as of now the locks are not getting ordered. Now you I still me how can I fix the lock ordering how can I fix the lock ordering. If you remember when you were discussing about object locks I said sinking will work only when the locks are compete or the threads are competing for the same lock okay so right now at the first step are they competing for the same lock no they are not and that is why you lead to a deadlock okay so you can simply fix this okay you can simply fix this by making them fight for the same lock. Okay and how will you do that let us see if I want them to fight for the same lock I can say that they fight for the same resource so suppose I say synchronize resource one for thread one T2 is also going to request for lock one only now in this scenario what will happen only one of the threads will receive the lock and the other will automatically go into waiting. And because it does not have the resource one it cannot acquire resource to also it is completely on a weight state then T1 will go it is holding R1 and then it would not have to wait for R2 right rather it will hold R2 as well whereas T2 is now waiting for both the locks as T1 has all the resources it needs it is simply going to execute and after the exit is going to execute. So, in this situation both the locks will be available for thread 2 to execute okay so remember concurrency problems can be solved very simply by making the threads fight for the same lock okay is this clear everyone any doubt over here okay so such kind of questions can come in the exam that will give you a thread ordering system okay locking system figure out deadlock exists or not okay so simply make that diagram. And figure out any doubt in this how to figure out that the deadlock exists or not I will share the notes once the link is available okay if that is clear please go ahead and answer the next quiz. So, the question was which one is not a deadlock. The question was which one is not a deadlock situation context whiching does not relate to locking it is simply saving of data and hence that was the correct answer okay. Moving on to the next quiz please answer. Colour me what is happening at the back okay so you just saw the whole and wait situation where the one lock was being held and the other one was being waited for okay now one classical example of this is the problem of the dining philosopher problem okay now in this problem you will be able to see five philosophers sitting on a round table and something very interesting happens here that right now the philosopher can do only two things either it can eat or it can think okay now for thinking it does not require any folks but for eating it requires two folks one for left hand one for right hand okay. Denoting that one threat needs two resources to complete the job okay now here what happens that the number of folks is also limited philosophers were five and folks are also five a number okay and each for is placed on the left side of the philosopher now imagine if all the philosophers go and pick the fork placed on the left what will happen. People at the back you can discuss softly also nobody stopping you was the point of yelling in the class okay tell me if all the philosophers pick up one fork on the left of them what will happen they need two folks to eat they have picked up the left one now each philosopher picks up the fork on the left you will pick up the fork on the left you will be able to notice that there is no fork left for the right hand and hence they will lead in a deadlock condition they are holding one resource and requesting the other one right is that clear now nobody can eat also nobody can think also because they are waiting to eat but resources not available they are waiting to think but they are held up with one resource okay so this is the deadlock condition and this is known as the dining philosopher problem okay so what does this teacher that multiple threats may need multiple resources and if every thread holds one resource and waits for the other one I can say a deadlock is always going to happen okay so what is important lock ordering is very important now in the same scenario instead of locking the left the left fork every time okay I synchronize this okay I don't want any philosopher to starve what do I do I let some of the philosophers to hold both the folks now you see here one of the fork is not held by anyone this is completely fine I have let two philosophers to pick up the fork and eat now you see what is happening P2 and P4 are able to eat as well as P5 P1 and P3 are in the thinking mode okay so your CPU is not being wasted your work is happening now once P4 and P2 are done eating P1 can pick up the fork and P3 can pick up the fork so we will let them have turns and pick up the fork for eating okay this is known as proper sinking of the locks and here starvation is also not happening because eventually everyone will definitely get their chance is that clear everyone if that is clear go on answer the next quiz pretty easy you see dining philosopher is clearly showing you a circular weight situation and here by fixing the lock ordering how the philosophers are getting the resources you can fix your deadlock okay so one of the very crucial things that we have learned if you fix the lock order deadlock can be avoided there is one more algorithm which will be using in order to avoid deadlock okay this we have discussed already again by safe ordering we are not saying that the deadlock will never happen we are just saying that it may not happen next is the bankers algorithm and this bankers algorithm is based on the banking applications that you have okay now this is an algorithm for deadlock avoidance okay it is not a concurrency problem it is an algorithm itself okay now it does not wait for the deadlock to happen instead what it does is that before allocating the resources it will check is it safe to what the two share the resources in the given order or not okay if the current requesting that the process has done is in the right order I will go ahead allocate the resource if not I will make the process wait okay so to think of this we will take a simple bank example bank is the operating system customers are the processes money is the resource which is limited and the loan request placed by the customer is the resource request and is the money lending safe or not is denoting the safe allocation okay so imagine that you are a bank and you have limited money to give loan for okay now imagine some customers are coming to you and asking for loans now the bank cannot just blindly go on lending money before giving a loan bank will think if I give this loan will I have enough money to satisfy the other customers because if I give all my money to one single customer nobody else will be able to benefit from the loan okay so if the answer is yes I have enough money to sell the money enough money to satisfy the other customers I will lend the money if the answer is no the bank does not have money then they will ask the customer to wait okay because right now if I give the money I might get into trouble and this is the bankers algorithm pretty simple yes so similarly the OS is going to check if I give this resource to the process now can all the processes still finish safely or not okay so according to banker the process can either enter a safe state or an unsafe state safe state guarantees that if you follow this pattern you are not get our deadlock and unsafe state says that there is no guarantee right now you might not go into a deadlock but you can as well okay so what data will be given to you the available number of resources which are currently free with the operating system have been mentioned the maximum instances of a resource that is demanded by a process how many resources have been allocated already what is the current need of the process that has been mentioned now the need is actually calculated with the help of the maximum resources which I'm wishing for and the total allocation has been made now if the need which you have calculated for every single resource for every single process is less than or equal to the available number of resources then I can go ahead and lend the resource so for example let us see over here talking about the process one process one needs a maximum of three instances of R1 two instances of R2 and two instances of R3 how many have already been allocated to zero zero have been allocated which means the need is going to be 3 minus 2 one of R1 so check how many are available 3 are available so my need of resource one is one less than equal to three which is possible and hence I can allocate this similarly need of resource two I have two already the maximum capacity okay but the process does not have any react okay check the system how many are available three are available so need is less than equal to available so this is also possible then for R3 I need or that maximum I need is to allocation has been zero which means currently I want two resources available R2 and hence I can give this so I can say that the orderings fine I have sufficient resources to give to the process and hence P1 can execute if any of these statements or these conditions would have been false then P1 could not execute okay this is what we will have to do in the numerical also okay pretty easy nothing difficult simply check the need and then compare with the available okay so we will have a small numerical so that you can try it out okay so given information is that there are three processes P0 P1 and P2 and resources are a BC now this is the maximum matrix denoting that these processes need these many at max resources this is the allocation matrix showing how many instances have already been allocated okay now the question is saying what is the need of P1 how much does P1 require at the moment okay so what is the maximum of P1 you can simply refer to this row maximum of P1 is 3 2 2 allocated R2 0 0 so from this you can calculate the need very easily just go ahead calculate the need and tell me can you execute P1 or not the need formula is given to you simply fill this and tell me what is the need of P1 and if the need of P1 is satisfiable then can I run P1 or not come on guys be quick simple subtraction nothing else Shreya is correct see need is nothing but maximum minus the allocated maximum minus allocated every time so need of P1 is 1 2 2 okay so need of P1 is going to be 1 2 2 now if I give you the available matrix you can figure out whether P1 can execute or not correct answers in the chat okay just a moment okay now suppose I say that available is 3 3 3 can P1 execute yes if the available is 3 2 0 can P1 execute no because even if one of the resources is not available I will not allow P1 to execute okay great so this is the kind of numerical which you will be getting in the exam try out the next one okay in this also you have been given the total available resources and the need matrix okay so need you don't have to calculate it is already given okay simply tell me if the processes are P0 P1 and P2 which processes can execute okay and out of all the three which one will execute first okay so you see over here 7 is less than equal to 3 this is not true need is greater 4 is less than 3 no 3 is less than 2 no so P0 definitely cannot execute first okay P0 cannot execute first what about P1 for P1 1 is less than 3 2 is less than 3 2 is less than equal to 2 this is also fine and hence it can execute okay next if you see P2 P2 6 is less than equal to less than equal to 3 this is false okay 0 less than equal to 3 that is correct 0 less than equal to 2 but I cannot execute this because this a resources not available so which one executes P1 executes great okay now you see over here as of now it's a very clear when that P1 is definitely going to execute in the next few numeric as you will see how you will have a competition amongst the processes to execute first okay we will discuss that in the later half as of now I hope you all are able to understand the process it's pretty easy okay could you answer the next question okay so the bankers algorithm is all about figuring out a safe sequence if a safe sequence does exist I am going to allocate resources and run my process okay so up until now we have seen how to detect a deadlock we have seen how to avoid a deadlock okay now we will see how to recover from a deadlock if the deadlock has already occurred then I should break the deadlock avoidance here will not work okay so if the deadlock has already occurred they are two methods of recovery one is process termination and the other one is resource preemption first we will discuss process termination so firstly you will figure out which processes have created the deadlock okay then suppose here T1 T2 and T3 have created a deadlock okay how will you figure that out with the help of the cycle graph which I told you figure out the graph and then see which process which processes are there in a deadlock condition after this what do you do figure out all the processes and kill them all okay kill all the deadlock processes okay now as all the processes or the threats are terminated deadlock is automatically removed and this is the most simple approach out there but it is going to be very very costly also because it will practically erase all the work which all the threats must have done okay now the next thing that we can do is do not kill all the processes at the same time rather try to kill the processes one by one so every time you check if the deadlock is there remove one process and see if the deadlock has been removed if the deadlock has been removed there is no need to kill the other process if the deadlock is still there you will go ahead and keep repeating the removal of processes until the deadlock is removed and that is done okay now the question arises which process to kill at the moment so the OS can choose amongst different parameters how it is going to kill the process first thing is check the priority of the process okay yes if the priority of the process is very low then kill the low priority first then check how much work has that particular threat done because if the work is too much and you kill the process you will have to roll back to a very later memory okay next thing is that how many resources is a process holding so you try to kill a process which is holding the most number of resources because ideally if those resources are released they will go to all the other processes that I have okay next is how many processes or how many resources are still needed by a process if there are too many resources needed then you should probably kill that one because that is the one holding your resource which is available in the deadlock next is what is the restart cost because you want to make sure that the resources are needed by a process or that deadlock removal costs you the least okay so to recover from a deadlock the OS must sacrifice one process so that the others can simply continue okay this is the first way of process termination which removes the deadlock okay second is known as resource preemption now resource preemption again is happening in hold and wait condition so in order to break it you simply understand that which process is holding which resource and then try to remove the resource from that process or that threat that is it okay but it is not always possible okay CPU can be preempted but what will happen once you are removing a lock you can say you will have to figure out till which point T1 executed while it was possessing the lock one okay so when you figure that that is the one now you will have to move the memory okay now imagine that you are printing printing was a task which you are doing while you had this resource one can you revert back printing no printing is done already so even if you are trying to preempt the resource the preemption might not be safe okay so for resource preemption also you have to choose the victim very wisely okay first of all choose that which process will lose all its resources usually that process which can lose all the resources will have the lowest cost okay because it might not have written anything in the memory as of now okay second thing is rolling back if a resource is taken from a process check that process may need to go back to a previous safe state which means you will have to undo some work from the earlier point okay or restart from an earlier point the next is starvation now imagine if you are removing resource from the same process over and over again the process will go into starvation and always will say that it is unfair okay so you have to choose properly which thread will be chosen as a victim and whose lock will be wrong is that clear so these are two processes for deadlock recovery okay any doubt as of now any question any doubt so we have discussed prevention prevention is with the help of proper lock ordering then we saw avoidance with the help of the bankers algorithm unlock ordering then we saw detection with the help of cycle creation and then recovery by deletion of the process or resource preemption okay this is all about deadlocks now from deadlock you will get questions of like numerical and theory questions both you will not get coding from this but remember the concurrency problems that you have done till now if you don't follow the prevention and avoidance in that case you might enter in a deadlock in your code itself okay and then it will give you daily in that scenario okay with that said we are done with deadlock and now we move on to a couple of questions okay please answer this one it is about the producer consumer you so here again you see that the producer is producing five items right then what happens consumer consumes two items then producer again produces three items and then the consumer is going to consume four items okay this is what is going to happen and if you calculate this the empty will be equal to six and full will be equal to two next one what is the correct order of producer consumer locking system so so the producer is first of all going to check if empty cma 4 is available which means empty slots are available then if it is available it is going to acquire the mutex after this it adds items to the buffer that you have okay and then you will release the mutex once the items have been added and that last you can say that the full cma 4 will be released saying that cma 4 is now full you can take up items from here next one is about a locking system try it out very simple locking system tell me what will this lead to so very easy this example we discussed as well T1 is holding on to lock one which is needed by T2 and T2 is holding all two lock two which is needed by T1 so this is a circular weight okay this can also be known as hold and weight okay both will be the correct options over here if the hold and weight was available next one it is the same situation where philosopher 1 and 2 and then the situation where philosopher 1 is always asking for the left one where holding the right one and so on and hence I can say this again is going to be a circular weight condition and deadlock is definitely going to happen if you let everyone eat the food together next question so okay so circular weight happens when both the threads are competing for different different locks in order to fix it make them wait for the same lock and your job is done just fix the lock ordering and circular weight will not happen answer this one so so so this question we have done in the previous class where instead of naming it food bar we named it first second so if you see I have two semaphors one is food and one is bar sem which denotes the permissions which they will have to take now here you see that I want to start with food and I want bar to weight as I want bar to weight I will make it acquire permission for bar sem and bar sem will have zero permits available whereas I want food to start and hence food sem will have one permission if you want you can completely eliminate this also and just start with bar sem but this is a better order when you allow food to run once and do not allow bar sem to run now in a converse scenario when you would want bar first okay in bar first you will just change the order bar sem will start with one permit and food sem is going to have zero permit okay I am going to share a numerical doc with you all and we will discuss all the numerical given here one by one I hope you can see the numerical doc try out with the first question the question says that there is a bounded buffer which has capacity 5 initial values have been given and the producer is performing the given sequence and then the consumer performs the given sequence okay so the following orders have also been given you have to find the correct number of statements okay they can be multi correct as well check now just refresh and check you must have the access now these are some fample questions this is like the pattern which will come in the exams multi correct so you have to tell which all can be correct access has been shared please check take 5 minutes solve this problem and then we will get to do it together okay if you see here the the statement saying a producer is going to be able to do it together if you see here the the statement saying a producer performs the following sequence consume a performance following sequence is nothing but the lock ordering okay so where your question starts is the operations which have been given okay even start production P2 starts production that is correct see what happens over here the initial state is Mt is 5 full is 0 mutex is 1 and buffer as of now has 0 items in it okay it has 0 items the locking system was mentioned it is the usual locking system nothing has been changed there P1 is going to start the production as P1 start production Mt slots will become 4 in number full slots will become 1 and the buffer I can say so the mutex is 1 as well because you have acquired buffer items are 1 okay one item has been added next was P2 again produces if P2 produces Mt items reduce okay full will increase mutex will still have 1 value buffer items at the moment are 2 in number okay these are buffer items okay again 1 item has been added I can say when P3 is going to produce again Mt spaces will become 2 full spaces become 3 mutex is still 1 and the buffer now has how many items 3 items okay then the consumer is going to consume as consumer consumes Mt slots will increase full slots will decrease right full slots will decrease mutex is 1 and as of now buffer has how many items 2 items only then P4 starts again as P4 starts it will start production if it is producing how many Mt slots will be there okay 2 at the moment full will be 3 mutex will have 1 and buffer items are 3 at the moment and then again C2 will go and consume and keep on doing the same task so if C2 is going to consume 3 Mt will be there okay full will be 2 mutex is 1 now items will be remaining as 2 again I can say Mt items will be 4 or Mt slots will be 4 because C3 has consumed full is 1 mutex is 1 and buffer items are 1 at the moment because 1 has been consumed now let us look at all the options which were given to us is the final value is the final value of Mt 4 that is correct Mt is equal to 4 final value of full is 1 that is also correct buffer contains 1 item at the end that is also correct buffer does contain only 1 item at the end next is the consumer 3 block no consumer 3 is not blocked because of proper lock ordering mutex is also 1 and you did have items which you could consume and that is why C3 is not blocked remember C3 is not blocked and at last the mutex value is equal to 1 that is also correct mutex will be 0 when none of the things are working as of now mutex is 1 any doubt in this ok great move on to the second question now and try it out second question is about the bankers algorithm or is no second question is about deadlock detection you have 3 resources available resources at the moment are 1 0 0 and the current system state is also given how many have been allocated how many have been requested now according to this you have to tell if the following statements of which of the following statements are true ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok now move on to the third one so in this you see ABC was the right option ok check out the third one ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok