you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you So, let's get started everyone. Now, what operations have we talked about in the database management system as of now, we have talked about how to create new tables in the database, how to create the entire database, how to insert the data into that databases and how to update, sorry, how to retrieve the relevant data from the data set using the select queries. But if I think from building my own application, is this the only requirement that I am going to have? Is this the only requirement that I am going to have everyone to be able to just create insert and read the data? No, what other requirements I might have from the database? Manipulating the existing data. For example, if I talk about a couple of examples here, let's say I talk about an e-commerce platform, on an e-commerce platform, let's say if I have an orders table that is going to keep track of all the orders, right? What are the things that I, what are the things that I might update in that orders? No, orders means an order that is already placed, right? So, can I say the most important thing that I will need to update is the order status, which is whether it is ordered, shipped on the way delivered, returned, different status, whether the item is refunded or not, the ratings for that particular order. All of these things I am going to keep on updating. So, I am going to have a list of the orders, ratings, right? Delivery date, blah, blah, blah. Along with that, can I say whenever an order is placed, right? I also have the inventory. So, whenever an order is placed, I need to go to that particular product and reduce the inventory of that product by one, right? So, there are a lot of other things that I will have to keep on tracking about and keep on updating as user's perform actions onto that data, right? What other example we can take? Can I say the other example that we can take is a banking system? So, in a banking system, after every transaction, right? We need to update the account balance, right? User also have options to update their personal details, right? Like their profile password, their login password, a lot of other things, right? Their address is, their home branches, right? So, from these two examples, what we can see is that real world data is something that we need to keep on updating as operations are going to be performed as user are going to perform some actions, which means we need to have a systematic and ordered or we need to have a structured way of being able to update the data that is present in the databases, right? But what you need to understand is that there are millions and millions of entries present in one single table when we talk about scalable applications, when we talk about applications deployed for the masses. For example, if you talk about the user data of SBI, how many active users do you think SBI have? So, as of 2026, the State Bank of India servers over 52 crores or 520 million customers. These are the number of customers that they serve. These are not the data for the number of accounts that they have. One customer can have multiple accounts as well, a DMAT account, a bank account, savings account, checking account, credit account, low account, right? So, the original number might be much higher than this. Is that the idea? Okay. So, when things are happening at scale, right, there cannot be any margin of error while any update is being performed. Let's say you want to update the 3, 4, 2, 5, 1, a throw and you go and update the 3, 4, 1, 5, 2, a throw. What is going to happen? A blender is going to happen, a financial blender is going to happen and we have seen that in real life as well. I bet all of you must have seen the news that someone's account mistakenly got credited by 80 crore rupees. One died of heart attack because their account got credited by 10 crore rupees, right? So, all of this, why is this happening? This is happening because of incorrect update operations. So, we need to understand that whenever we are talking about update operations, right, it's one of the most critical operations because it is what is capable of modifying the existing data, right? Now, when I talk about SQL operations in general, when we talk about the database operations, there are majorly four types of database operations. We generally classify the database operations into four categories which are called as CRUD. C stands for create, R stands for read, U stands for update and D stands for delete. So, what I have here is, how do I create? To create the data, I know I just use the create keyword. To read the data, I know I just use the select keyword. Now insert into becomes a part of the create itself. So, insert into is what we use to insert a data into the databases. We don't consider it amongst the CRUD operations separately. It's just a part of the create operation. Update for update, we're going to use the update keyword and for delete, we're going to use the delete keyword. So, whenever you hear the word CRUD from now, don't get scared, it is just create, read, update and delete. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes, we have done create, we have done read. Read, we are going to keep on doing as we keep on modifying our queries, as we keep on making our queries more complicated. So, the read operations are going to continue for the entirety of this course. In today's session, we're going to be talking about the update operations. So, what is the update operation in a sequel? The update operation in sequel is used to modify the value of one or more attributes or columns for the selected tuples in a relation. Relations here talks about a table. So, tables are also called as entities or relations in your DBMs. So, the update operation is used to modify the values of one or more attributes, which means in one update operation, if we want, we can modify one attribute, if we want, we can modify multiple attributes at the same time as well for selected tuples, which means every single update operation will come with a wear clause. Every single update operation will come with a wear clause to identify which selected tuples do we want to update? Everybody present in the session, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes, superb. Now, whenever I talk about an update operation, you have to understand that the update operation is always a two step process. That number one is to perform the selection and the step number two is to perform the modification. So, selection basically talks about which rows of this particular table needs to be updated. Modification talks about what attributes needs to be updated and to what values those attributes needs to be updated. Everybody present in the session, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Yes, that's great. Now, here we need to understand that first the selection part would happen and then the modification part would happen. So, the order is also the same as what is written on the blackboard on the project. Now, whenever we are performing an update operation to ensure correctness, update operation must be first precise, which means you should with the precision target only the selected rows. Let's say you want to update 10,000 rows, you cannot update even 10,000 one rows in the databases. You need to exactly update the rows that are required to be affected by your update operation. It is validation, which means whenever we are updating the records, it is always a good practice to validate whether the correct records are updated or not. Third, which means again update operation should not be allowed freely for anybody to execute, especially mass update operations. We will talk about what mass or bulk update operations are in the moment and fourth is consistent. So, whatever properties are present in the databases, any update operation should adhere to those properties. For example, if in the student table student ID is a primary key, we know it has to be unique. So, if there is a student with a student ID 5 already present in the table, I cannot update the student ID of another student and make it 5. So, consistency must be maintained while performing any update operations. Everybody thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, that's great. Now we will talk about some best practices to follow. Again, these are not a rule but a general best practices that we should follow while performing any update operation, which will make sure to... Okay. Aayu, Karu. This is your class. That one is working right? Okay. So, what are the best practices that we need to follow while performing any update operation? The first practice is to always make sure to preview the data. Verify whether the correct rows were selected and then understand the impact. Which means, as I said that every update query is going to be paired with a wear clause to select the certain rows that I need to update. Now to check whether the wear clause is selecting the correct rows or not, before any update operations, I am going to use the wear clause in a select operation once to preview that data. Everybody first of all thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Yes. Once I preview the data, I am going to verify whether this is the correct data that I want to update or not. And once I have done that, I am going to understand the impact which means I am going to check if the attributes that I want to modify in this selection gets updated, what will be the impact of that? Will it make the data or will the data remain consistent or not? Is this going to be a correct update or not? Is this exactly what I want to do or not? Everybody, a thumb up first of all if the netiquities of an update operation are clear to all of you, thumbs down if there is anything that does not make sense to anybody here? That's great. So if this makes sense to all of you, let's quickly talk about what is the simple syntax for the update operation. And my friends, this is what a simple syntax for the update operation is, which is update table name set column 1 equal to value 1, column 2 equal to value 2 and so on, which means multiple attributes can be updated at the same time, where whatever is the condition for you to select those tuples, select those rows. We will write an example for this in the moment and this will make things more clear to you, but can everybody give me a thumbs up with the basic syntax of the update operation makes sense to all of you? Yes or no everyone? Yes, that's great. So here now what I'm going to do is I am just going to preview the course enrollment table once. This is my course enrollment table or let me go back to the, this is my courses table. Now what do I have in my courses table? I have the course ID, course course name, credits, department ID and instructor ID. What I'm going to do is I'm going to show you an example of an update operation where we do not write a warehouse. Right? Everyone, what do you think will happen if I will execute this query? Update courses set credits equal to 5. All credits will turn 5. Let's see if that's the case or not. Oh, all the credits of that particular table got changed to 5. Now imagine if auto comment is on, these changes have been made. Is it possible for me to go back to the previous state of the table anyway? Can I go back to the previous state of the table in any circumstances? So what has happened because of this mass operation? What happened because of this mass operation is first of all a bulk update happened. Now imagine something like this happening in Amazon. Amazon is running a promotional campaign and Amazon wants to convert the prices of 10 products to one rupees. And there comes one of the best engineers that they ever hired. Right? He writes a chat GPT prompt to write an update query and forgets to mention that we only need to update the price of these 10 products. Chat GPT being chat GPT follow every instruction from the bottom of its heart and write a query indicating something like this. Update orders or update items set price equal to one. And imagine even for five minutes if all the products on Amazon gets listed for one rupee. What are you going to purchase everyone the first thing what are you going to purchase? Aak one can add. You know something like this happened with us once. Have I told you this story? How many if you know what pepper fries? Anybody knows what pepper fries? So it's an online furniture store. This is 2019 when pepper fries was upcoming company. I'm not sure how they're doing as of now. But I was sitting at my friend's place right here in Belendur. I used to live far far from here in Hebal. So I was there at his place over a weekend. We just woke up from a pretty bad hangover. We were just chilling. We just ordered some food and we opened pepper fry to order some bean bags. The moment we opened the pepper fry we could see the price of a bean bag was minus nine rupees or minus nine nine. I forgot the exact amount. I think it was minus nine nine nine. Whoever wrote the code forgot to check a simple condition that the price cannot be negative. On the front maybe it was an error on the back end but it was minus nine nine nine. So what did we do? We added five bean bags. Total goes to minus around 4900 something something and we tried to place the order. But the order did not go through why because it failed on the payment gateway that payment gateway have introduced that logic and the negative payment cannot be introduced. So we were like we need to do something very fast. So what did we do? We searched for products which still had positive price. We added them into the cart. So we added products worth around five thousand five hundred into the cart. The total was minus 4900 plus five thousand which is around six hundred rupees. So we got five bean bags. 15 kgs of beans. Two study tables for six hundred rupees. Okay. And when we ordered when we placed the order. I think almost five to seven minutes after that we just informed all of our friends and by the time they checked it. It was already fixed. Did might have done a rollback or something. And we were very unsure on whether our order will be delivered or not. Because in these type of circumstances what companies usually do is they just reply back to the sorry email that this was a mistake on our end will give you a coupon of five hundred rupees or something. But no. Our order got delivered. So for six hundred rupees we got so much of an item and again that was a different case. That was not because of an incorrect update query. That was more because of some constraints being missed. But again that was because of an update very because someone went and updated the prices of the items to minus 999. So that is why whenever an update query is being executed right need to be very, very careful. The update query is that you going to be executing. If you present in the session first of all can you give me a thumbs up if this is making sense to all of you present in the session. Yes super. Now what I'm going to do here is I'm going to write an update query. So let's start writing a couple of update queries. Where the question number one will be to update the credits for CS 10124. Everybody present in the session can you try to write a query for this all of you. I want all of you to open your own databases that you've created in the last lap session and start writing this query on to that databases once you've done just give me a yes in the chat. Just give me one second. I'll be back. Please write the query. You You You You You You You Okay. So let's try to write the update. Now before I write the update query as I've discussed as a safe practice what I'm going to do is I'm going to write the say. So select star from courses. Now where clause is what I need to check. So where course code equal to CS 101. And do I have the recollection in this query. Is the selection correct everywhere. Yes, the selection is correct, which means I can go ahead and perform the update operation. So instead of the select part, now what I'm going to do is. I'm going to go ahead and call update courses. Set which address do I need to set. I need to set the credits. What do I need to change the value of credits to. I need to change the value of credits to four. And the condition is where course code is equal to CS 101. One row has been updated. And let's see. Yes, the credits for CS 101 have been updated to everybody. A thumbs up. If you're first update queries crystal clear to all of your thumbs down. If this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Yes, that's great. Now I will go to the course enrollment table. In the course enrollment table, everyone, what I have is. I have the enrollment between the student and the course. Their enrollment date semester and the grade. Right. Now, in this case, what I was. For student one. He failed the course to. So he want to re enroll. Which means I want to update the. Enrollment date and. The. Grade. Okay. Here what. So here everyone. Grade is an attribute that can be null. Right. Grade is an attribute that can be null. I need to do it. I need. Grade. Date to today. Whatever is the date today and I want to update the grade to a null. Everybody present in the session. Can you please take two to three minutes and try to write this update query. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. What all we want to use as an enroll date. Okay. Okay. Grade. Is it grade or grades grade equal to null. Right. This is what I want to set. Now for which student I want to set. Where. Student ID equal to one. And. Course ID equal to two. So which attribute will be updated. This attribute should get updated. And let's see what has happened. Sorry. This. If. Yes. No. One last point about the update query which is. These. These set operations. Support. What do they support? They support arithmetic operators. For example, let's say if I go to my courses table again. In my courses table, I have the credits. So for any particular course, if I want to update the credits, that's it for the web development course. I want to update the credits. So what I'm going to do is. Update courses. Set. Credits equal to. Credits minus one. So what I want to do is I want to reduce the value of credits by one. I can just do credits equal to credits minus one. Where. Force. Court equal to. Yes. And what will happen. So for the web development. The credits have been reduced to. If. Do you have a question? I'll be happy to answer. Okay. Now everyone. I'll give you a question and. I'll give you two minutes to think about that question. two minutes to think about that question. What is the question that I am going to give you? Let me first show you two tables. So, you do not need to give me two tables. So, you do not need to give me two tables. So, you do not need to give me three tables. So, you do not need to give me two tables. have to be filled. There is no entry that can be null in the instructor's table. That's great. In the courses table, if you see the instructor ID can be null. What I mean by that is in the course table everywhere. In the courses table, you can create a course without assigning an instructor to that particular course. Everybody first to follow thumbs up if this is making sense to all the few present in the session, yes or no? Yes? Super. So I'm going to insert two entries into the courses table and two entries into the instructors table more. You put every day. One, two, three, four. What time do you wake up? One hour later, don't talk. All right. Thank you. zweiten with peace. So Okay. So now if you will have a look at the courses and the instructors table, these are all the courses that I have and these are all the instructors that I have. Now here if you will see what I have is I have two instructors in scalar which are not a part of any course who are not teaching any course and the same time I have two courses here which are not being taught by any instructor. Everybody present in the session first of all can you give me a thumbs up if this is situations clear to all of you. Now what I want you to do is I want all of you to write a code to update the instructor for so that you are going to. It is a fellow let us write another query. So this is the instructor table this is the courses table what I want is I want you to print a list of all the course name credit and the instructor name for all the courses. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up first of all the question is clear to all of you thumbs down the question does not make sense to anybody. So what you need to do is you need to print the course name the credits for that course and the instructor name for that course for all of the courses present in your table. So it is a simple insert into operation right insert into then I provide the name of all the attributes here when I provide the name of the attributes I am not even the instructor I give you because that is an auto-entrubing. If you do not provide the names of the attributes if you just directly give the values then you will have manually inserted instructor ideas right so I have given that these are the attributes that I am going to insert these is the value of the attributes insert into queries I think we have already practiced right but any confusion in this anyway anybody can explain to me how I will write the query for this given question how do I print the list of all the course name credits and the instructor name for all the courses that are present in your course is stable sorry by taking a join okay everybody yes or no how do you feel aware with what a join is all the people in the session I want you to give me a thumbs up or a thumbs down for what a join is super no words so here before we get down to what join is let us first try to understand what the problem is with the problem statement that is given to us right so the question given to us wants us to print the course name wants us to print the credit and wants us to print the instructor name for that course but in the same table I don't have the instructor name what I have is I have the instructor ID everybody first of all the thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you yes now if this was a question that was asked for one single instructor or one single course that tell me the course instructor name for data structures course what would you have done you would have first run a select query on the courses table you would have gotten the instructor ID for that course and then you would have used that instructor ID to print the name of the instructor with that instructor ID instructor to his professor Anita Sharma right but that is not the case we have to print all the courses and all of their instructors so executing multiple queries is in the option what other option do I have one option that I can think of is why don't I change the table and put all the instructor details in the same table everyone can I do that first to follow yes or no right instructors are going to teach courses courses are going to be taught by instructors why don't I put courses and instructors in the same table can I do that everywhere yes that's then imagine a situation where one professor is teaching 10 courses can I first of all say that all the details of that professor will be present 10 times in the courses table everybody present in the session yes or no yes so putting everything into the same table is going to create data redundancy and here we are seeing the data redundancy only present 10 times right imagine something like Amazon where you have an inventory of a product present 20,000 times so the product is ordered from Amazon 20,000 times now imagine in the orders table if you put all the details of the product how many details do I have about a product as the product pictures have the product names product description product reviews review pictures right questions FAQ answers to those questions every single thing I have imagine that being present 20,000 times how much of a data you are or how much for space you going to waste right so the biggest problem of putting everything into the same table is data redundancy second problem is imagine here one day what happens this the professor decides to quit so I want to remove all the details of that professor from that single table in which courses and professor details are present you want to remove all the entries where the professor name equal to professor Anita Sharma or professor ID instructor ID is equal to 2 can I say along with the instruct details the course details will also be removed can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session so putting data all together at one place is going to impact other things being removed as well other independent entities mission being removed as well and third let's say tomorrow doctor Anita publishes a paper right we have an attribute that number of publications can I say I will have to go to each and every entry and update that for example in the orders table if I have the product details present and if the product details or the product price goes up by a thousand I will have to go and update the product price in each and every each and every row similarly here as well I will have to go and update the entry in each and every row even if you miss one update the data will become inconsistent everybody first of all thumbs up if you understand why we cannot put everything all together in a single table yes or no yes so generally when we design databases right what we do is we we will pose our data into multiple tables which is called as normalization of the data there are different normal forms one NF2 NF3 NF we will talk about all of this as we will proceed with the course but data decomposition is going to be a very important property okay when we will talk about this design we will understand how much of function is possible doable and will be optimal for us okay so there will not be any perfect answer when we will talk about is always the game of trade-offs but here everyone now if you see now the problem is that the data is now present across multiple tables so given that the data is now present across multiple tables what I need is I need to write a query that is capable of connecting these two tables and fetching the required information course name and credits from here instructor name from there using the instructor ID everybody present in the session first of all what we want to do makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no yes and what do we use to perform this what we use to perform this is a concept which is called as joints so what is the joint a joint is an operation that combines two tuples from two relations based on a condition so two rows from two different tables are connected based on a condition here in this case of the instructors in the courses table right this row database management system is going to be connected with the instructor's table or condition instructor ID present in the courses table should be same as the instructor ID present and be instructors table everybody a thumbs up first of all if this is making sense to all of yes so joints uses relations to connect two tables together now what are those relations that joints exploits to connect tables together anybody what relation do you think here the joint is using to exploit or join is using to connect these two key tables together absolutely correct instructor ID in the courses table is a foreign key that refers to the primary key instructor ID is present in the instructors table right so joints can only be made on foreign keys present in a table that refers to the primary key of another table can everybody give me a thumbs up first of all if this is making sense to all of you present in the session because that's how we build relations in database management systems right super so what is going to happen here is here I have the courses table in the courses table what I have is I have the course name I have the course credits and I have the instructor ID right now the next table that I have is I have the instructors table I am going I am not going to write all the other metadata right so what I have here is I have the instructors name or I have the instructor ID and I have the instructors name right let me give some dummy entries here I am not writing the other attributes have given because they relate but otherwise we have all of the other attributes here it is but so let's say the course name is AI credits are two instructor ID is one in the instructors studies one and the name is I use course name is HLD credits are four instructor IDs two two two shitheads and course name is LLD credits are four instructor IDs two so these are all the entries that are present in this table now what you want is you want to fetch the course name the course credit and the instructor name so the first thing that you're going to do is what you're going to do is you're going to join these two tables based on the attribute that is common between these two tables which is your instructor ID instructor ID is the attribute that is going to be used to join the table because instructor ID is a primary key here which is referred to as a foreign in the course table right now whenever we perform a join right join is a two step process okay join is also a two step process how mine works is step number one that happens is a carti-struck between the two relations in this case courses and students so what is a carti-struck every when can you give me a thumbs up if you are clear with that we have discussed carti-struck when we were talking about sets right so if a set has n elements another set has m elements carti-struck product is all the possible combinations of one element from set a one element from set bn into m pairs into here also if I write down the carti-struck product right the carti-struck product is going to be name credits instructor ID from the courses table instructor ID from the instructor stable and the name of the instructor right so I am going to have AI21 for AI21 I am first going to have one あ you choose tomoreini if you agree that other combination, MFF is different Then I have HLD 4 2, HLD 4 2, LLD 4 2, LLD 4 2. So the first step of the join would be to compute this Cartesian product. Basically perform all the combinations of columns or all the combinations of rows and tuples that are possible between the two tables. Now what we are going to do is now we are going to use the condition that is defined to filter out the selected or the required rows. So what is the condition that is defined, the condition that is defined is that the instructor ID in the courses table should be equal to the instructor ID in the instructor's table. So in which entries that is happening? These are the entries where that is happening. So these are the final entries that will be present in the output of the join operation. The other entries will be ignored. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this join is crystal clear to all of you. A thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Please let me know if you have any questions I will be happy to ask questions that you have but is the concept of a join crystal clear to all of you. Because what was the question, the question was you have to print the course name, the course credit and the instructor name. And again, department ID that is not a primary key in the instructor's table. For the instructor's table also it is a foreign key right and multiple instructors can be a part of the same department. What you want to fetch here is from the instructor ID you want to fetch the details of an instructor present in the other table which table instructor's table. So instructor ID is what we will use to uniquely identify an instructor in the instructor's table for which we have to fetch the details. Now, given that this is clear to all of you let's write our first join query right. So how does a join query works? First of all what do you need to understand is we are going to be usually executing the join queries. When we want to perform data retrieval, join will be used in case of data retrieval queries. So join will basically generally be used in case of select queries. Now what is it that I am required to select? Hello. Am I audible to all of you? So what is it that we are required to select? What we are required to select is the course name, the credits and the instructor name. I will come to that a little later. Let's first focus on the other parts of the syntax which is select dash. Let's leave it to star. Let's say I am going to select everything I am going to modify this in the second iteration to select the relevant requirements that I have. Select star from now what is the primary table on which we have to see. What is the question for all the courses I need to print the course name, credits and the instructors name. So primarily what I will be doing is I will be querying the courses table. So select star from courses. Now which table do I need to join with the courses table, instructors table. So this syntax for that will be join instructors on. On courses.instructor id equals to instructors.instructor id and that is it. So what did we get in this case from the courses table. We got the course id, course code, course name, credits, department id, instructor id, instructor id. This one is from the instructor's table. Instructor name, email, department and joining here. And you can see for the course one CS101 database management system credits are four department id's one instructor id's one with which I have joined instructor id one name is Dr. Rajesh Kumar email is this. What I have is I have both the tables combined and only those rows where the instructors id are exactly the match. Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk about how to select the relevant attributes. So the first thing that we're going to talk about is aliases. So what is an aliases everyone. Aliases are basically when you use to write select pandas s pd. This is that pd. Why do we do select pandas s pd select every single time now we have to use pandas in the code we can use pd instead of pandas. Just like that whenever you're selecting star from courses and you write c after that c becomes the alias for the courses table which means anytime now that you want to refer to the courses table you're going to use the keyword c for that. Now what do I need to select from this. We want to select c dot course name c dot credits and i dot instructor name c dot course name c dot credits c dot instructor name from courses c on join instructors i on. Now here also everyone instead of using courses dot instructor id you can just do c dot instructor id equal to insta dot instructor id. You can just do i dot instructor id you can just use the aliases and now see what we have. What we have here is we just have the course names credits and the instructor names present here. But I have a question from all of you present in the session. Which is do I have all the courses present here. Do I have all the courses present in our dataset in our output. No which courses are not there. Blockchain and AI course is not there. Why is blockchain and AI course is not there. What is common between blockchain and AI course. They were not null the instructor id for those courses were null and we were doing a join on the basis of the instructor id. Everybody first of all the thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Why did this happen. This happened because of the type of join that we have formed. So what are the different types of join operations that we have. The first join is inner join. The second is left join. The third is right join and the fourth is full outer join which is not supported in my sequel. So what is an inner join. Let us first try to understand that inner join is the default join that is used. So when we use the keyword join or if I use the keyword. Inner join. I am going to get the same result. Now what is inner join. Inner join will give you the results for only those rows where there is an exact match between the attribute that you have used in the condition. For example here the condition was courses.instructor id should be equal to instructor id. So you are only going to get that or those rows here which will have an exact match. But that was not what the question was. Can everybody give me a thumbs up first to follow this is making sense to all of you. The question was for all the courses that are present in the courses table. We have to print the event information. How do I start. So whenever there is a join that we perform right. The table on which a join is being performed is called as the left table. The table which is being joined is called as the right table. So whether there is a complete match or not. If you want all the entries of the left table what you do is you use the left join. So I am going to execute the same query only difference in that query will be left join. And now tell me do I have blockchain and AI present as well. Everybody yes or no do I have blockchain and AI present yes I have blockchain and AI present. What is the only difference is that for them the instructor name is going to be null. Any attribute that you check for these will always be null. They will not have that value present in the given output. Now imagine let's say what you want is you wanted the opposite of that you wanted a list of only those courses which are being taught by an instructor but you want the list of all the instructors to be present. And that case what I am going to do is instead of a left join I am going to perform a right join. And when I perform the right join what happens is all the instructors names whatever attributes that is selecting from the right table all of them all the rows will be displayed for them whether there is a matching attribute present in the left table or not. So you can see the course name and the credits for these two and you do not have blockchain and AI present in this. Everybody present in the session of thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Yes. Unfortunately full out of join is not supported in my sequel but what is full out of join full out of join will give you every entry here every entry here as well which means you are going to have I use and should present with credits and course name is null. You will have blockchain AI present with these credits and instructor names as null. So all four of these rows will be present in the full outer join. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if the type of join operations that we have makes sense to all of you present a yes or no. Always full out of join different from. In normal gen there has to be an exact match neither I use and shit is will be there neither blockchain and AI will be there in full outer join all the entry in cases where the matches are not there you are going to get a null values. For example for blockchain and AI there are no instructors that we have any added list that is the null values there. Similarly for I use and shit is there are no such as the data press so for any attribute the DS electing from it. Present in normal join or a inner join normal join as to those entries where instructor ID is an exact match. It is the. How will the norm update. Care to us full outer join. Again it does not give you the entire cross product. We will not get cross product may you also get entries which are mismatch. For example instructor ID one and details of instructor ID two. That will also be present in the cross product that is not going to be present in any joints that is going to be filtered out. I am saying where the details with that element are not even present you going to get null. Cross product may if there are 10 instructors for every course you are going to get a mapping with all of those 10 instructors. Whether whatever was the instructor ID present in the course is stable. Now what we will do is we will the last topic for the day and we will practice a question on join and then we will end the session. In the next session which is your lap session we are going to a last join queries. What is the. I think that we are going to come out in this session is the types of relations which is also called as the cardinality of the relationships. Now there are three types of relationships everyone. Let us first take an example to understand the one to one relationship in detail. So, here what I have is I have the Indian government passport database where I have two primary tables. First is the user's table in the second is the passport table. Now in our country in India is dual citizenship legal. No right we cannot be a citizen of multiple countries at the same time if you are a citizen of India which means one user can only hold one path. The session of thumbs up this makes sense to all of you. Yes can one passport belong to multiple people. No right one passport will also belong to one individual person. So here what I have a user's table where all the user's present user ID name date of birth address password all of those things hashed passwords everything present and then I have a passport table present where I have the passport details passport ID passport number expiry date and the user for which this passport is created. If you need to follow thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Now here also what I have done is user ID is a primary key in this table which I have used as a foreign key in the passport table. So there is a relation between the users in the passport table what is the relation. Unuser can only have one passport one passport belongs to only one user which one to one relationship the cardinality of this relationship is one is to one. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present in the session. People appreciating a little bit more responses here if it makes sense to you. Down if this does not make sense to anybody. Here to everyone that is great my friends. Now let's talk about one too many. Let's talk about an example of one too many. So here if I look at both of these tables the course is in the instructor's table or if I look at the departments and the staff. First question that I would have from all of you is can one instructor be a part of multiple departments. One instructor will belong to one department for example instructor one two nine and ten belong to the computer science department. But can one department have multiple instructors? Yes. This is one too many or many to one relation. The cardinality of this relation is one too many or many to one. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Very good. And last is the example of many too many. So this is an example of our course enrollment table. Now department is an entity courses are an entity instructors are an entity students are an entity is course enrollment and entity. This is an example that I have taken in the first session explained all of you is course enrollment and entity. No, what is it? It is a relationship this table stores the relationship between what everyone. Between what courses and students. Why do I need a table to store these relationship. I can't I put these values in the courses of the students table is because of the nature of that relationship. Can I say one student can be a part of multiple courses here. Everybody present in the session. Yes or no. Yes. At the same time each course can also have multiple students enrolled in that course. Everybody a thumbs up if that is also making sense to all of you present in the session. So what type of a relationship this is a many to many relationship and for many to many relationships generally the relationship we store in the form of a table which is called as a junction table or a relationship table. Everybody if all the types of relationships makes sense to all of you comes down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Questions anything is not clear. Please let me know I'll discuss that with you. So when we will be creating schema design for business from along with the tables basically which entities you're storing which relationship storing for each and every relation we're also going to be talking about the cardinality of that relationship in the table. Everybody a thumbs up and a few thumbs down and this does not make sense to anybody. So all of you is great my friends. Now the last and final question I'll give you five minutes to write the query for this. So the first question is making sense to all of you which is for all the enrolments what we need to do is we need to print the course name the student name the instructor name the credits of that course and the grade that that particular student got in the course. Now whenever any query needs to be first need to do an identification of the tables in which these attributes are present. Post identify how many tables you will have to use then check if there will be a requirement of joining that table what will be the primary table and on what table the joins will be happening right. Take five to ten minutes try to write the query for this and then we will discuss the solution everyone. Select query to learn me. Write the query here. First of all what I'm going to do is I'm going to identify do I need which data. So the course name going to come from the courses table student name is going to come from the student table instructor name is going to come from this instructor table. Credit is going to come again from the courses table and going to come from the course enrolment table. So there are in total four tables that we want to join in this particular query everybody a thumbs up the first to follow this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no yes or no everyone yes now what will be the primary table that we will query on can I say the primary table that I will query on will be my course enrolment table because I want to print all the enrolments here everybody a thumbs up if that is making sense to all of you present in the session that's great. So I am going to go on the course enrolments table right what do I have to select I'll talk about that in a moment now course enrolments table let me use an alias CE for this okay join which tables do I need to join with the course enrolment tables firstly I need to join the students table to get the students ID right join students on for students I'm going to use the alias s course enrolment dot course enrolment dot student ID equal to s dot student ID this is the first join that we have performed but is that the only table that I need to join no I need to join more tables which more table do I need to join now to get the course name and credits I need to join the course table on the course ID right so space again a join for courses I'm using the alias CE on courses dot course ID is equal to course enrolments dot course ID is that the only table that I need to join do I need to join any other table as well instructor name is also required and that we're going to fetch from the join between the courses and the instructors tables I'm going to perform one more join on i dot instructor ID is equal to C dot instructor ID now my query is complete all the joins have been made now I just but are the attributes that I need to select for this particular query correct everyone yes which add to select for this particular query so I need to first of all select the course name student name so this is the last problem discussing after that I need to pick the attendants max okay so C dot course name s dot student name I dot instructor name then credits credits is present where in the courses C dot credits and then the grade where is the grade present in the course enrollment table CE dot grade and can I say I've selected all the attributes properly should I run the query now and what I have is I have your course name student name instructor name credits and grade present for all the enrollments how many rows were present in the enrollments 41 rows were present there 41 rows are going to be present here as well everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this join query is crystal clear to all of you thumbs down if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody so what you can do is you can perform one join to join three join four joins any number of joins that you want you can perform that right again join just gives you the selections so join is basically you can assume to be one whole select query now from this everyone if I just want to get the courses in which R of Sharma is enrolled or I want to get the list of all the students whose grade is A what am I going to do I'm going to run the same query at the end after the join after the selections I'm just going to add my wear clothes and everyone see unknown column A in the wear clothes oh sorry so now what you have is the same thing but you have implemented a wear closet that so once the select part is complete after that you can do every single thing on this joined selection on what we discussed for a normal select query as well everybody present in the session first of all a thumbs up if whatever we have discussed today is crystal clear to all of you a thumbs down if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody present in the session so here that becomes important in case if there is an anomaly between tables for example when you're joining all of these tables together if I ask you to print the course idea as well and if you just end up using course ID then you will get an error why because course ID is present in the courses table course ID is present in the enrollments table right so whenever there is an anomaly it becomes very important to define which table you are selecting the attribute from otherwise that is not required or mandarin right but as a healthy practice it's best to just always use the table name dot the attribute name make sense now everyone if this makes sense to all of you present in the session let's quickly take the attendance and then we would be done for the day what I have here is so maj to you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you