🤷, 🤷 So as I told you in the previous talks that we have discussed the concepts and the theory of the topic. So we have discussed the concepts and theory and in today's class we will be discussing about the numericles and the code implementation. So let us have a quick recap of what we have done. So we have discussed about what exactly is arrival time. Arrival time is when the process arrives in the ready queue until unless the process has arrived you cannot start its execution. Then comes the burst time the total time needed by the processor or the process to complete the execution that is known as the burst time. Then we have the completion time that when exactly did my process complete its execution. Next is the turnaround time. Total time that the process has spent in the system either waiting or actually working and then comes the wait time. How much time has the process spent waiting in the system? There were two important formulas that we discussed as well. One was for the turnaround time this is given by completion time minus the arrival time. Then you have the formula for the wait time this is going to be turnaround time minus the burst time. In all the numericles that you see we will not mention the complete full forms of the terms rather we will use TAT WTAT BTSCT. So you can make the assumption accordingly. Whenever we will do questions of priority scheduling the higher the number given in the priority the higher will be the priority. Suppose I have 532 then 5 is the highest priority and that will execute first. Next we will see that in case a process has the same priority and we want to choose between that. In that case choose whatever process has arrived before. Like I can say if one process arrived at 0 has the priority to another process arrived at 2 has the priority to you are going to choose the one which arrived sooner which means at arrival time 0. Next if the arrival time is also the same then you have to move ahead and choose the process with the shorter burst time. Is that clear? These are the assumptions which you have to make. Any doubts in the assumptions I hope you all are comfortable with whatever terms that we have discussed in the previous class. If yes we will get started with the numericles. So this is the very first numerical it is an easy one. It is about FCFS. So I will show you a demonstration of how the numerical will work. And then I will solve one question and you will have to solve the other ones. This is from FCFS which means first come first serve. So if I am solving an FCFS question I am saying whatever process comes first solve that first. You notice over here that every single table that you will have will have only 2 values arrival time and the burst time. It will not have the completion time given. So how will you calculate the completion time with the help of a Gantt chart. So let us now see how we will be making the Gantt chart. So you will go ahead and draw a line. You see at 0 which process has arrived at 0 which process has arrived. P1 has arrived. P1 arrives and this is first come first serve. Is first come first serve preemptive nature? No, it is non preemptive nature. It will execute up until the execution is complete. So now the burst time required was 4. So it is going to complete at 4 unit of time. Is that clear? So what is the completion time now? I started at 0. I am ending at 4. What is the completion time? 4 only. Next if you want right now only you can calculate the wait time but we will wait for a while complete the Gantt chart and then calculate. Now when we are at 4 what processes have arrived? P2 and P3 both have arrived which one are we going to execute first? P2. Okay. So now you will choose P2. As I choose P2 how much time it P2 need for completion? Three units burst time is 3. So if I execute this starting at 4 after 3 units of time how much time would have elapsed 7. Okay. So I have 7 that P2 will also complete. So I can say the completion time of P2 is 7 done. Okay. Next what process is remaining? P3. As P3 is remaining P3 will now go and execute for how long will it execute? 2 units. I am starting at 7. I am executing for 2 units. What is the completion time? 9. Okay. And see like this you have filled the completion time column and you have created a Gantt chart. Okay. This what you are making over here is known as the Gantt chart. It is very very essential. Okay. Okay. If you do not make the Gantt chart it might be a problem for you to fill the completion time column. So now I have data of completion time. Now calculating TAT and WT becomes very very simple. Now tell me how much time did P1 wait for? Wait for. P1. How much time did it wait for? Zero. Okay. P1 waited for zero seconds. What about P2? P2 waited for three seconds. Why? Because P2 starts is work at 4. Okay. But it arrived at 1. Yes. Yes or no? And that is why the wait time here was 3. Then what about P3? How long did P3 wait for? 5 seconds because it started it work at 7 but it arrived at 2. Okay. So it had to wait for 5 seconds. Is this clear? Is this clear? Everyone any doubt in calculating the wait time? At what time did you start your job and what time did you arrive? You just subtracting that nothing else. Now the turn the round time. How much time did your process spend in the system? But if you see P1, how much time did P1 spend in the system? P1. 4 seconds only from 0 to 4 it has worked. What about P2? 6 seconds because you see completion time was 7 but it was arrived at 1 only. It means that turn the round time was 6 seconds only. Next come in to P3. P3 is going to complete at 9 but it has arrived at 2. So what was the turn the round time? 7. Okay. So see either you can calculate the wait time first or you can calculate the turn the round time first. I will recommend you to calculate the turn the round time first and then move on to the wait. Is this clear? How the numerical is solved? Yes. Just fill the values according to the formula. Then you want to be asked to create the complete table rather you will be asked to give the average wait time. And the average turn around time. So tell me what is the average wait time over here? 0 plus 3 plus 5. What is the average wait time? 0 plus 3 plus 5 divided by how much? 3. So how what will the answer? 2.6 approach. The 2.6 is the answer. The average turn around time 4 plus 5 plus 7. This is going to be approximately 5.5. And this is the output that you will have to generate in your questions also. Is the numerical clear? This was first come first solve the process which has arrived first and it is going to be non preemptive in nature. Any doubt in this? Any doubt anyone? At least say yes or no. If there are questions go ahead and ask. Try this one. Same. FCFS. Yeah. 5. Slide this one. 好. U can put your answers in the chat about the average wait time and average turnaround time. Is the Wi-Fi not working? On my app at the Wi-Fi is working very slow so let us solve a couple of questions and then I will share the link. First create the Gantrach with the Gantrach you will get the completion time. Then calculate the turnaround time then move on to the wait time. I am giving the formulas here again in case you have missed that. Akash the answer is correct. I run for the third process you have given the wrong answer. TAT is correct for all and CT is also correct for all. The wait time for the third one is wrong. The wait time for Bada hello you it add Dum волcán dia es unus Pst, Sol, and Emrekels have remar, you will see multiple such numericals in the exam. FCFS numericals are the easiest as you will move on and we discuss the preemptive kind of scheduling. There you will see calculation becomes a little tricky. Okay, shall we do this together? So first of all which process has arrived? Which process has arrived? P1 has arrived and it has executed till 5. And then after this P2 arrives as it is FCFS, P2 arrives and you see over here it arrives at 2. And it needed the burst time for 4. So if I am at 5, definitely it has arrived and till 4 it will execute which means 9. After completion, now P3 is going to arrive as P3 arrives it is going to execute for only 1 burst time which means at 10. So now you have the completion time of all the processes. P1 completion time is 5, P2 completion time is 9, P3 completion time is 10. I hope everyone has received the same answer. Now you can go ahead and calculate the turn around time. What is the turn around time for P1? CT minus AT, what is the turn around time? Guys if you do not respond the class will go on very slow and we have a lot of questions to solve. Please tell me what will be the turn around time? Turn around time for P1. Yes 5 is the correct answer because I have completed my work at 5. Did I wait? No, did not wait, wait time is 0. What about P2? P2? Use the formula? Is going to be 7. What about P3? P3 is going to be 6. Wait time similarly P2 if you see I was done at 7. I needed only 4 seconds but I have waited for 3. Same for P3, I completed in 6 but I needed only 1 which means 5 units was spent waited. From this you can now easily calculate the average wait time and the average turn around time. Yes the average wait time over here is how much? 2.6 again and average turn around time was 6. Moving on to the next one. Tell me are you all comfortable in doing it now? Then solve this one. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. Thank you for watching. ok, in preemptive the higher the number the higher is the priority. So, again you will draw the same gantt chart starting at 0. At 0 has any process with the highest priority arrive. Any process with highest priority has it arrived yes P 3 sorry P 1 has the priority of 3 highest priority it has arrived. So, P 1 is going to execute for burst time of 5. Now the arrival time or the current time becomes 5 has any other process of higher priority arrived. So, I would now in competition I have P 2 and P 3. P 3 has a higher priority. So, this has arrived and here the burst time was 2 sorry the burst time was 3 and that is why the completion time becomes 8 ok. So, this is complete this is complete what about the remaining one. Now I only have P 2 remaining it had the lowest priority burst time was 2. So, at 10 it has completed. So, as of now are you all able to notice that this is working like a non preemptive priority scheduling algorithm because I did not remove any process from the CPU yes ok. Can you all calculate the other times of wait time and turn around time with the help of the GAN chart yes ok. Shall we move on? We will do a medium level question now try this out ok. In here you will see that preemption does work. So, this has the highest priority. So, this has the highest priority. P 3 has the highest priority higher the number of priority that is the highest priority process ok. Sometimes in the question it does say lower the number in the priority higher the priority ok. So, please check the question accordingly our assumption is the higher the priority number the higher is the priority. So, right now which one has the highest priority P 3 has the highest priority, but has it arrived? No. Instead at 0 which one has arrived? P 1 has arrived ok. As P 1 has arrived I can say I can execute it till time 2 ok. If I have executed P 1 till time 2 the sometime must have elapsed and the burst time remaining would have been 4 ok. At 2 you see which process has arrived? P 3 has arrived. As P 3 arrives right now for how long will it execute? It will execute till its completion because no other process has a higher priority than P 3. So, it executes for 3 sorry for 5. So, 2 plus 5 is going to be 7 and this is also done right now. Now amongst these processes which one is having the higher priority P 1, P 2, P 4 were the processes which one has the higher priority P 1 and P 4 had the equivalent priority yes or no? You see P 1 also has 2 P 4 also has 2. So, which one will execute? No first we will decide on the arrival time. If the arrival time is also same then we will move on to the shortest burst time ok. First priority then arrival time then burst time. So, right now which one is going to execute? P 1 is going to execute and P 1 is going to execute for how long? 4 units of time for 11 the is the completion time this becomes 0. Now what is remaining? P 4 is remaining with the highest priority it executes for complete 2 units this becomes 13 the completion time and then at last P 2 executes and it executes for 4 units. Is that clear how we are executing any doubt in this? Again please ask if you are having any doubts in this particular question. We will pre-empt according to the priority and then arrange according to priority if priority is same arrange according to arrival time if arrival time is also same then arrange according to the burst time. Now from the Gantt chart you have found the completion can you all find the wait time and the turnaround time? Yes or no? Let us go over this once. So, for P 1 what is the completion time for P 1? What is the completion time for P 1? You see when was the last time P 1 was executed? Here the completion time is 11 then for P 2 when was the last time P 2 was executed? 17 right 17 is the completion time? Yes or no? For P 3 check here when was P 3 executed last over here the completion time is 7 and then P 4 P 4 you see over here it completed at 13 done okay. Now from these values can you figure out the turnaround time and the wait time or not? Can you can you not please either just press thumbs up thumbs down in the chart if you are able to if you are not able to please tell me we will solve this together okay great okay. So, I hope you all are able to visualize that the Gantt chart is the most important thing if you make the Gantt chart correctly you are able to solve all the numerical also okay great. So, this was priority okay. I will discuss the approaches at the end I hope that is fine otherwise we will miss all the numericals okay. Next we will solve the round Robin approach okay. What used to happen in round Robin? The time quantum will be given. So, suppose right here I give the time quantum or the time slice of two units. So, it means now this is also behaving like a preemptive approach right. So, round Robin works in the same FCFS manner which means whatever arrives first you have to execute that first is just that you have to execute it for the given time quantum. So, in here round Robin you are going to start at 0 which process has arrived P1 has arrived. First time is 5 can it execute till complete 5? No it will execute till only because the time quantum is 2 and the burst time then becomes 3. After this amongst the P2 and P3 P2 will execute first because the arrival time was 1 as P2 execute it takes two units. So, current time becomes 4 and the remaining burst time remains 1 after this you see P3 is going to run as P3 runs it needs only one unit of time and this is done. Now, as it is round Robin it will again start with the FCFS only okay. Again I will start with P1 P1 is going to execute for how many units two units correct and the burst time remaining will be 1 then you will run P2 it executes for only one unit yes yes 7 this becomes 8 and next what will you see now as this is 0 what is remaining only P1 is remaining and it needed one unit to complete that is how round Robin works. Now, if you see again for P1 it was done at 9 okay P2 execute till 8 and P3 executed till the completion time 5 okay. Now, what is the turn around time from 0 to 9 you can see the P1 has stayed okay. The turn around time here becomes 9 what about P2 7 because completion time was 8 and I arrived at 1 I have spent 7 units of time in the system same for P3 the completion time was 5 I arrived at 2 and that is why turn around time becomes 3 what about the wait time how long was I waiting turn around time is 9 my burst time required was 5 for how long I was waiting 4 I completed my work at 9 I arrived at 0 and the burst time was 5 what is the wait time based on what is the wait time based on tell me what is the wait time based on how much time I needed to complete total turn around time how much time I actually needed I was waiting for 9 minus 5 which means that I was waiting for 4 units of time P2 I needed only 3 seconds but I was there for 7 which means I was waiting for how many seconds 4 seconds P3 I completed my work in 3 I needed only 1 which means I was waiting for 2 that is why we have so many pauses right is this clear how we are filling the table for round rub in yes or no okay moving on to another one yeah P2 waiting time P2 why 7 minus 3 see turn around time if I am seeing it is 7 yes or no completion time was 8 completion time for P2 was 8 I have arrived at 1 how much time have I spent in the system CT minus 80 7 units then how much time did I wait I have taken 7 seconds to complete I wanted only 3 so 7 minus 3 it will be 4 yes yes I will repeat the question okay so as of now I am at 0 P1 is going to start working time quantum allowed is only 2 units of time if I execute for 2 units how much burst time is remaining 3 burst time is remaining okay then P2 is going to execute for 2 units only as if executes for 2 units current time becomes 4 and the burst time will be remaining 1 next P3 is going to execute as P3 executes it needs only 1 second to execute current time becomes 5 as of now I have executed everything in FcFS with time quantum of 2 units is this clear okay now I will restart I will restart from P1 I am starting at 5 P1 is executing executes for 2 units which means current time becomes 7 but the burst time here needed was 3 3 minus 2 which means now the burst time remaining is 1 is this clear then I move on to P2 as P2 is executing how much time does it require only 1 current time is 7 it required only 1 time current time becomes 8 this process is complete now what is remaining P1 is remaining as P1 is remaining it executes still 9 and that is it okay so see this is done so first of all calculate the completion time completion time go to Ganttart see the process what was the last mark so here P1 the last mark is 9 which means it needed 9 time to complete okay what about P2 P2 last can be seen over here completion time is 8 then you see P3 last over here completion time was 5 is this clear how the completion time was calculated now move on to the turnaround time okay turnaround time is when did I complete when did I arrive okay so completion time was 9 I arrived at 0 itself which means total time spent in system was 9 P2 completion time is 8 I arrived at 1 total time spent in system is 8 minus 1 is 7 for P3 completion time is 5 I arrived time quantum has been given as 2 see okay generally in question time quantum will be 2 it will be changed ask for the question okay now P3 if you see P3 the completion time is 5 and I arrived at 2 okay turnaround time was 3 the turnaround time clear now move to the wait time so total time I took was 9 seconds how much did I need only 5 so how much was I waiting for 4 units of time P2 total turnaround time was 7 I needed only 3 which means 4 units I must be waiting then for P3 so for P3 see turnaround time is 3 I needed only 1 to complete so wait time must have been 2 is this clear now and you can visualize the wait time here also see P1 is finishing over here where did it start over here all the time P1 was waiting is this clear now any doubt in this question please try this one time quantum again is 2 only time quantum is 2 just make the Ganchard correctly you will get the values of wait time and turnaround time do you guys have lunch after this class can I extend it for like 5 more minutes let be okay just 5 how many of you are able to solve this question please raise your hand ok Acker's the value is of by 1 point. In both the wait time and the turn the round time. The round is starting as fcfs arriving at 0. If it is executing for 2 units, how much burst time is remaining? Next, p2 is going to execute. Now you have p3 executes for 2 units. The burst time is going to be 1. So, 1 to 4 are going to be done. The burst time remaining is 1. The burst time remaining is 0. The burst time remaining is 0. The burst time remaining is 0. p3 must have remaining time 1. Let me just calculate again. Now p2 executes for 2 units. The burst time remaining is 0. The burst time remaining is 0. The burst time remaining is 0. Please respond to the burst time remaining. Let me see the code approaches for this or do you want to see more examples or more questions? So, first let us do for round Robin. Are you able to observe that for round Robin I can implement 2 algorithms. Now, we will go ahead and solve that first. Now, in the class that you have created, you must have the PID, burst time and now you will also maintain the remaining time. Now, using FCFS I am using shortest job first now along with round Robin. Now, once you create the constructor, what will you receive PID arrival time burst time? Please notice that at the moment you have to calculate your own remaining time. When a process is starting, what will be the remaining time? This is me creating the process for the first time. Once the process has not started, the remaining time is going to be equal to the burst time. So, this is done. Go ahead and create the process. After this, you are going to sort the array. In the beginning, as we have saying that arrival time is important and initially round Robin works like FCFS only, no matter what it is, you are going to go ahead and sort it on the basis of arrival time only. 80 minus B8. Now, my data is sorted. So, have you guys discussed the data structure of Q's? Yes, Q's you have done in Java? Yes or no? Just for a quick check, Q is like going to have a front and it is going to have a back. New processes enter from the back and whatever has been service leaves from the front. So, Java has a predefined data structure for Q, you all can use that. So, we are saying that now instead of creating an array of the process, I will create a queue for the processes. Why am I creating the queue? If you remember when we were solving for non-preemptive approaches, I was simply putting data at the back and completely removing it. But right now, it will keep on reentering. Keep on reentering on the basis of the remaining time that we have. So, it is a better approach to use a queue. So, I am going to create a queue with the process object. Use link list to update it. Same, the current time as of now when I am beginning is going to be 0. And you also have to keep account of how many processes are complete. Otherwise, you will have to check every time what is the remaining time. If remaining time is 0, I will have to remain a terminate, dark process. So, I am also creating a variable to check how many processes have been completed. And initially, the completed processes are 0. Then, I will maintain one index for the queue to see where I have gone. Now, again, have the total completion time, total turnaround time and total wait time. All are equal to 0. Now, I can say that if I had n number of processes, I can check is my completed process. All the processes which I have completed are less than n, n being the total number of processes. If the completed processes are less than n, it means I should keep on executing my algorithm. Otherwise, there is no need to go forward with it. Now, I have to add all the processes that have arrived till the current time into the ready queue which I have. So, I will say, I will also need an index variable. I have taken that. So, while the index is less than n and I will go to the processes array which I have. And the index, the current processes arrival time is less than equal to the current time. What can I say that this process must have been arrived? Is that clear? I should be inside the valid sequence and the current process must have arrived. So, I will check the arrival time is less than equal to the current time. If the process has arrived, I will send it to the ready queue. So, in the queue, I will add what am I supposed to add? The current process. The process object will be added in the queue. Now, we will move on to the next process, how to move there by doing index plus plus. Is that clear everyone? What we are doing? First of all, we make sure that there are processes which are not complete yet. Then we see that if the index in the array is available and the process has arrived. Simply add that in the queue and then move index in my array. Okay. After doing this, my ready queue is now ready. Now, if my queue is empty, can I keep on doing something? No. If my queue is empty, it means that I will have to re-add processes from the processes array to my queue. So, at the moment, I check if the ready queue is empty, no process is available and CPU is going to remain idle. Okay. So, what will happen if my queue which I had is empty? Is empty is a predefined function? Okay. If my queue is empty, I should move my current time to plus plus so that I can make sure some process arrives in the ready queue. Because now, current time has increased and some process might have that arrival time and you will continue. Okay. So, at some moment, I can say the processes will arrive in the ready queue. Okay. As the processes arrive in the ready queue, I can say now I can remove it from the ready queue and start its execution. Okay. So, from the queue, I have removed it. Okay. This is me basically picking the current process. Now, I can say the process will run either till the full time quantum is complete or only if the remaining time needs to be completed. Okay. So, again, I will have to take a value for, I can say the remaining time basically. So, I can check if the process over here, if p dot RT is greater than 0, which means if the remaining time is still there. If remaining time is still there and I have said that I have executed my process, what do I need to do? Tell me. If I have picked my process, it has run in the CPU, but remaining time is still greater than 0. I will have to add it back in the queue. Yes or no? Okay. Or even before doing that, let us do one more thing. Let us process it. Okay. For processing it, I can say let us have some execution time. Now, what will be the execution time? Can I say whatever is minimum amongst whatever is the remaining time and the minimum time quantum? Okay. So, right now my process is going to execute either. You have the next process 2 p m. Then I asked you guys, do you have lunch or what do you have? The round drop in code is a little bit because there are a lot of things that we will have to cover. So, we will stop right now. Is the code getting too complex for you all? Yes? Okay. Let us do one thing. We will take up the codes for all the scheduling algorithms. By the time I will add the approaches in the notes. So, in the next class that we have, we can discuss the code as well. Okay. Just a quick brief. Are the numericals clear? How we have to solve the numericals? Mineracles are important tasks. You will get at least 10 marks from the numericals. Okay. So, please work on it. In case you are not able to solve the numericals, do let me know. We will do it again. Okay. So, 10 marks numericals will come in the exam. 10 or sometimes even more. Okay. Then the code is also very important, especially for FcFS, SJF. For SJF, we will learn preemptive and non-preemptive both. Okay. And then, code for round robin is also very important. Priority is not very important because it will work similar to SJF. So, FcFS, we have discussed in the next class, we will discuss these two codes. I hope that's fine. Okay. Also, I have added multiple numericals in this sheet itself. So, if you want practice questions for the exam, you can just practice whatever has been given over here. And I will add more assignments in the class. Okay. I'm really sorry the class went on for too long because of the laptop issue. We'll quickly take the attendance and then move on. Okay. If you are done with the attendance, you can move out. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.