So, were able to cover the complete logistic regression in the previous class or was anything left? Folks, you can start joining in the class here. Cool. What's anything left from the previous class or would you be able to cover anything? Cool in that case I would assume everything was covered. So, today we are going to get started with root cause analysis. What do you understand by the term root cause analysis? Anyone? What is root cause analysis? Any minority puts what is root cause analysis? What do you understand by the term root cause analysis? So, let's see what does it mean? Let's say we are suffering from a problem, there is a problem. For example, let's say if someone is sick, someone is having a fever. What do we do when we are sick or when we have fever? What do we do? Take medicine or go to a visited doctor, right? We visited a doctor. What is doctor do? So, the goal of the doctor tries to understand why are we having a fever, right? So, they are trying to identify the root cause. What is causing the fever? Then how does the doctor identify the root cause? Sorry. So, how does he analyze the symptoms? He asks you questions, right? So, a doctor asks you certain question related to your health, right? He asks you questions, right? Based on the answers to your questions, he comes to a conclusion, right? He deduces the possible root cause and kind of gives you recommendations, right? To rectify how to fix the problem, right? Yes, root cause analysis is kind of real world. So, something similar, we do in businesses also. Businesses also have some problems. I don't know what would be nutrition. People leaving the job, right? A lot of people have started to resign in a company. The management is decided by the buyer people leaving. What is the problem? What is the root cause of it? Our sales are going down. Buying, selling, selling. So, your role as a product analyst, data analyst or a researcher is to identify the problems, identify the root cause for the problems. And then, so that we could solve those problems. So, that's the reason, that's the rational behind root cause analysis, like why do we do root cause analysis? So, that's the reason. Is that here any questions, anybody? Any questions, anyone on this? So, that's the goal. So, today we will see how do you actually do root cause analysis with the help of a case study. So, I'm sharing this notebook with you. Cool. So, this notebook kind of talks about what is root cause analysis and how root cause analysis? So, what is root cause? root cause of the poor issue that had any problems with it. And what is root cause analysis? It's a systematic process of identifying the underlying problems of the product. A collective term of buying approaches rules and techniques used to uncover positive problems. So, under root cause analysis, it's the number of approaches and how do we identify? Equal to the study, root and end of the use. We're identifying the cause, comes under the suit cause analysis approach. It involves breaking the order from the end of the use, breaking the order from the charge, in small apart charge. Examination is part of the behavior and identify the root cause for the root to come into the problem. So, what do you do to get the order from the end of the use of the smaller parts? Analyze each of the smaller parts and try to identify which of the parts could have been caused by the problem. So, that's how we identify the root cause analysis. We'll see with the help of case ones. So, the other thing that I've noticed, some of these things that I've noticed, you know, the root cause of the last, the root cause of the end of the use of the large root cause. And I said, the problem is that you have to get the answer. So, that is the root cause that I've already expected. So, next we'll also look at the goals of the RC. So, we want to discover the root cause of the problem of the particular end. Understand, about the fix compensate of the large number of the end of the use. So, why is the root cause of the problem of the body? Why do you think you're learning from these end of the use of the important? To get it. Fixing complicated, any technical work, is a service problem. Why do you think you're learning from a intellectual's proper is a part of the answer? Why do you think you should learn from those? Any thoughts anyone? Yes, so that in future, something similar happens to avoid it. I wonder what it is. Well, if something similar happens, we know how to fix that. So, we have seen it this evening, so learning is not important. The environment in the system, I think it is a very good issue or the really success. So, that's the goal of root cause analysis. Within the organization, problems are made incidentally invested in the RC, and connected to the body. To be asked, the three fundamental equations. What's the possible, what's the problem? So, why are the only two to the right? We need to understand what is the problem. So, what to do, you define the issue by its impact of overall growth, but it has a problem. Sales is going down, and as a result, the revenue of the, or profit of the company is going down, because it has a revenue. So, you are going to take out the problem. Then, the cost, buy it in the house. What? Cost it, right? That's the root part of the root cause. So, you list down potential causal factors. For example, let's say, if you have to answer this question, the problem is, sales are going down. That means people are buying a product less. So, why do you think, why do you think what could be potential factors? How would you start with, why is it a revenue? What could be potential factors that could cause the sales to go down? Why do you think sales start to start with, or, anyone? So, let's say, you build a, you build a technological product. Now, just, you need to know that the problem is the way up to sell anything. But, you realize that you say, what is the first question that you will answer, basically? So, as I said, you have to bake it down into smaller parts. What question, first question, could be, are the sales down across every vertical, like across every geography? Across everywhere, or let's say, you have worked before a retail store, right? If the other sales are down across every store, or is there any particular store, right? So, let's say, the answer to the question is, a particular store, right? So, you have narrowed down the reasons for sales going down, right? You ask the question, like, let's say, over a retail store, like, DeMart or anything like that, or Reliance, something like that. So, your business manager asks you why, as sales have been down, you need to identify the sales. You ask the question that, are the sales down across the stores, or any particular store? The answer to that was particular store. So, now, you know, out of the whole universe, all the stores that you got, that you had in the country, there are only few stores where the sales are going down. So, now, you can specifically look down to only two stores. So, that has kind of simplified the problem for us. Let's say, from narrowing down from every store to a particular store. So, now, you can simply look, further drill down to see why the particular store is facing sales decrease. Why do you think a sales, a particular store, like, a store in electronics, is going facing a decrease in scale, a sales, why do you think that could happen? Why do you think, one cost could be, a new competitor has come up. People have started to move to that competitor, right? Quality of the products may be are not up to the mark in this particular store, right? Customer service might be a good cause, right? Customer service is not great. Things like that, right? So, you have to kind of ask questions. People are really down on the, probably smaller and smaller parts, such that you identify the root cause. So, that's how you kind of do it at a high level. We will see. So, you list the potential factors and I will know when the root cause. Then, what I can do is, I can define the rest solution, you can prevent that, I can get the back. What should we identify the problem? Finding the solution can be easier, I think, like, one should identify the root cause. All you need to do is, mitigate that. Is that clear? Any questions, anyone? I look into the forward. Next is the last step. You have to go to the rest solution, you have to proceed. So, these are generally guidance or steps you carry out on your analysis. Again, not very, these are the broad categories. Of course, you can go ahead and go ahead and ask. What are the first, first, first, first, first, first, first, first, first. Ask questions you get in your schedule. The problem. First, I will ask the question. Are the sales down across every store in India or just particular stores? Right? We will ask the question is, can I explain about it? Can I know your question and I will need consulting jobs after your graduation? These kind of, these kind of problem breaking down scenarios, are very common in self-demeanor issues. So, you have to ask questions, can I ask your question and I will go ahead and ask. I had to ask you correct a document. I have no credit for that One or answer. I will ask. Hand us the question. Then you need to then look for a second. Barnes taking the form, he saidults couldn't decide that because he may not Rob in the form before we pregunta him. Andате waiting and the charge is done, So that you are left with a narrow piece. But I will give you a previous case when we got the answer to the question that only particular source have some issues. So we strike the rest of the issues and we are going to focus only those particular source. So you can spy on the next part of the book. Check the link in the back. Here we have an important check the data. What is the answer that you are making? Do they actually hold it to work on it? But then you have to look at the data. Who are the cases that you have some other effects? So if that is the important, we should do the right test. This is your objective and then it's time. Then comes the internal factors. For example, these are the cases that the products are also. Let's say you are going to zoom out and zoom out and zoom out and it. Zoom out and says that number of orders are going now. Right. Let's say you are working at zoom out. A PM gets asked in question that they look. Orders number of orders are going down. Then the PM kind of asks are the orders down in a specific region or all over the country. In any region in any particular region. Let's say the answer to that question is. All over the country, right. Now the next question that PM could ask is. So if you want to launch any particular new feature. Did we launch any new feature in the app. That is kind of making it difficult for. So you can ask multiple questions. So let's say you can ask. Is there like is the app working fine or. Are there any technical glitches? So that question is the tap the app is working all right. Next question you can ask is. Did we launch any new feature. That could be causing this issue. Let's say the answer to the question is yes. Zumato region launch a feature that like in the past they are not a feature. That lets you. If you are a vegetarian, then your order will be delivered by a vegetarian. Delivery guy only. Right. So this had caused some outrage in the society. Which could possibly have led to their decrease in order. People by cutting or not. This could be one of the factors. So. Zumato launching this feature led to bad PR right. Bad PR or outrage. Bad PR or. Haley and after it amongst people is known as an external factor. This is an external factor. Right. Right. And if let's say there would have been a problem in a feature. Let's say the feature did not work well or the app was buggy. Let's say in this case. The question was no app has bugs. And this would have been an internal factor. Something that can the organization fix. Right. So. Internal factors and each of the details last part. How much information is to be shared with the features. Then I can get a factor. So only a. We have. This visual. He said in the world at least. So what is that. I said that you have a little bit of a problem. So. It's a little. People. The. High. The. The. The. The. The. The. The. The. The. So, one is, suddenly you can get help, right? You can get help conscious. They stop the ordering from outside or overhap, overhap, because you will get that the delivery app will be overhap, please the order was prepared. Somebody will have to go with it. So, once COVID happened, people stopped ordering online. So, that's a chain that you have to give in customers. Manly, on a job of getting a change, right? In general, it's a piece of care experience. You are certainly not, or certainly it's, it's not going to be a stress. People are starting to go for the same or money and not on the other side. So, that is just one of the macro economy things. How can you do that? You already, you know, in that already only, you will have to start at their own business only. So, that could have kind of taken away sales that would have put some attack. So, the market data analysis comes to an end. Is there any questions anyone on this? Any questions anyone? Cool. Business analysis will get a point that we should receive further. And there is a lot of things that we need to get into against the statistics. So, your capture and report to all the scientists is no matter how far you go. You do not know any of it. You need to kind of capture and report all the findings. So, these are some of the basics or a life cycle of the RCA. Is that clear to everyone? Any questions anybody there? Any questions anyone? Cool. So, that was around life cycle. So, this will be part of your life. Some of the questions and so, any of them is related to this. Any part of it should be related to the here, from the exam. So, that's about life cycle. By the way, did I share the sheet with you? Like the problem in extra problem sheet? Okay. So, I think the program we met I'm not sharing with you. So, after the class the CR should come to me. I can send you the sheet and you can practice those questions. Those contains what a mode of programming questions. Cool. So, that was life cycle of RCA. Is that clear? Anybody has any questions in this? Because if you have no questions and you have questions and I have no answers for my data. So, if there are doubts please ask now. Cool. So, developing one will be looking to a new study from a data. The problem sheet is that is a subject to climb from 5% to 3% that is 2% of its points in conformable orderable last week. So, the last week is we are seeing a number of people studying conformable order. So, we need to perform the order. When I begin to do the already-related we have a number of people in our school. I'm not passionate about it. To those, my other students are going to the percentage of the order used to be 5%. Now, that is, you come? 3% and the group of students is going to be easy. I hope every team will be able to get the percentage of its points. So, this is a very, very good case. When task is to perform the group because it has a health and it was an issue. You have been given the click stream data. So, this is the information that is given to you. Click stream data, which is the information collected about the user. While the browser is covered, it's covered. I don't look like a mobile app or the website app. This is the data that is that. When you are reading it, what else is there in the case? What else is there in the case? What else is there in the case? How much time is spent in each case? Say, you want to move the same page or you want to choose a page and you are throwing the page? How much time is spent in each case? What are the features that you have created? When I enter an algorithm to the card, you got the idea of the card, and you move the idea of the card. So, that. Why do you think that you have created a question? Why are you trying to get the question? Why do you think, Mintra, perhaps, is for Mintra? Any thoughts? Why do you think, Mintra tracks these features, like these. This information. I just want to ask a certain why I think, search, what people search is important to them? Yes. So, let's say, suddenly, some algorithm, some external thing, some of the algorithm, some of the commoners, some of the people started to wear, or basically started on their new brand of them, like, miraculously, so, let's say people start searching for that. So, you see more and more people are searching for the shoes, launched by the Rack Poly. So, that this could help? Mintra, what is the idea that is, if you have a shoe that from Rack Poly is brand, they could try to push this head, they could put it on the top of the algorithm, you know, it's a banner of the algorithm. They could send communication, they could send notifications, and image of a customer that looks like a shoe, and so, I don't know. So, the idea that they can get a picture is that it's a different moment, is really helpful, right? So, that is why they are kind of tracking these kinds of metrics. If you just get an idea, if you really need it, you can try to do the future, try to do the communication, if you try to do the banner, and you add on the app, how many people are needed for it? If they can get a lot of high internet, and you can see that, and if you are looking at a good internet, or a lot of it is closing the app, then probably this feature needs to be taken down. So, based on how many people are needed, this is really similar to the, the experiment you did was, it has success or was it a failure. So, that's why it's very important to track these kinds of metrics. Is that clear? Any questions on this? Because, see, product and security are, the advantage is, we are going to give us a problem, and we will now ask for it, and then, and then, and then, and then, and such a specifics. So, that's how product, product and security and security are needed. So, that's an important basis. So, cool. A single session may not be very useful on its own, aggregated fixed-team data from many places else, it goes a problem, because a single session would only be a verification about, single people, but I think that is a big good, a broader, insight about how the visitors are experiencing. Some examples. Many users leave out of the pages, but then, who would have been able to open it? But, there are many, many much lessons, very little products. Like, no products, no campaign, nothing, very initially, very, very yesterday problem. And, there are many things, which we have to open it. And, how do you get to know, whether they have left immediately after opening it, because, you are tracking time spend on each page. Is it time spend on, and one of the pages, which has, who will want it to be? Yes. Probably, because, the problem of both, because, it's a lot of things, and it's that it is, maybe, add more, campaign storage, add more, add more, add more, products storage, I will display more content on that page. Users often land on non-room page. It is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it is, it will love it, it doesn't find it, painters, not the home page. So, he might read the script design of the patient that attracts the, I mean, of course, represent there can come from there or simply be up such a wonderful voice for techniques of locality and that you have postural book will be coming from that. So, you are not acting, you are not acting. I will just sit for Gahneet, like people, if you open Mitra by yourself, that's an organic traffic. But the situation is coming from an ad, let's see, we are running an ad in Sikr. But when you put some leads, it is a solution. So, you need an ad, you become right. So, Mitra. Mitra has paid in Sikr, I would show that ad. And if you are, you need an ad, you are trying to show to Sikr. That it is much enough for your credit, immediate etc. Timur. Timur University has developed cities, it is going to be on top of them. You need more security and whether it be a needs or a user, a user, a user, that also can see us a lot about the customers. UX, what is UX? What is UX? User experience, how is it user experience? UI is user interface, user experience is user experience. So, it is a user experience, the author's experience. The author's experience is different, that's the user experience. So, user experience is not that great because if you're dropping us, people are not liking that a bit. So, there is an optimization. This is an argument which asks everybody that one of us should promote it in a search that is one company. I think this is going to be an extra-guided act and things like that. That's all component digital marketing. Any questions anybody here? Any questions, any doubts anybody? Is that clear, yes or no? Cool. Let's move to establishing assumptions. So, having assumptions is very important. Before, I'll let you take a look at the data, I'll let you take a initial decision. For example, this algorithm, what is the reason for the algorithm? What is the expectation? Sorry. So, basically, when you kind of click a product, add the card, the product kind of goes to your card, right? Let's say if I open, I have to open, let me open, let me open, let me open. Let's say I go to the main section. So, you see one thing, this is the page that I clicked on, because that was on the top, right? And it is not a homepage, right? When I click on it, it leads to, I don't know why. I click on this page online fashion store and by default it landed me on a parallel for women page. So, what does this gel mean? Why not the homepage, why it directly do the parallel for women? You see, I just typed Mintra on Google, and this is a sponsored one. So, this is an ad. Mintra paid Google to it, Google for this. So, he got it. So, Mintra paid Google for it, and I clicked on it. So, what is my traffic source? What is my traffic source? I came from which platform? I came from which platform to Google? Google, right? I saw Google and then from Google I came to Mintra. So, Google is the traffic source for me. So, if they are logging this data, the traffic source for my user ID or whatever for my let's IP, it would be Google. And see, I took one thing and I opened a app for the main. It is sort of open. It directly shows me a parallel clothing for women. So, what could this tell me? What observatory in the app means? So, that I have a identity centre with this page. In general. Why do you think they have kind of made this page general? Why not a parallel for main, why not a home page? Why not a other page? Right. So, they would have noticed that people come to Mintra and suddenly kind of move to this parallel for women page. That means, a lot of women come to their life home and specifically for my status. So, they thought by now directly make them reduce the friction. Why have them come to the home page, then go to the, why not directly they are buying page? Right. So, this reduces the user friction. Now, I directly am on the page that according to them, most of the customers are looking for. Right. Now, I'll go back to the home page. So, you see, I change the page. Right. They would have tracked how much for how much time I was in this page. Did I, so I did not see when scroll, right. So, they would be tracking whether I scrolled or not. Now, I am scrolling. So, this would give an indicate. They would track that this person also scrolled. Right. Now, I, let's see, it's on the home page, the home icon. Now, I can see a lot of different things, right. On the home page, a lot of ads, a lot of like 40 to 70% of things like that. So, what was the question again, for God's sake. Right. I had to call it. Let's say I go to men, I go to t-shirts, I select any randomly. And I kind of add to back, right. So, when I kind of add to back, I don't know why I cannot probably because I'm not logged in. Oh, I haven't selected the size, right. So, I selected the size and let's say I add to back. Now, this process known as adding to call, right. I've added the product to call. Right. So, this is how do we define the content. I use a case for the item on the product page, it has to be the catch of the list. They get a few data, you can add a new answer and I will come back. Right. So, this is a definition that we have agreed upon, the stakeholders that can't be defined in truth. This is an assumption, right. This is the definition that everyone has agreed upon. The goal is to kind of align on certain definition. Similarly, how do we define the origin? That version I have introduced in the model is order's process. Order's process is number of orders placed in our DA. Divide by total number of sessions in a day. Let's say now this is the first session. I have opened the mintra for the first time in the day. And I place an order, let's say I place an order. Right. So, what would be the conversion rate? I have opened the app for only for the one and the other. And in that session, I place an order. So, what is my orders for session? One, because I have opened the app once and I have placed the order in that one time only. So, my orders for session rate is 100 percent or one. So, one can order one order can contain multiple items. So, it's not number of items, it is number of orders. So, in one order, I can order three t-shirts once, right. It will not be three, it will be one because the number of orders actually one. The order pre-teacher is take out the number of orders one. If I place another order, let's say two jeans, then the number of orders becomes two. Because first order for three liters, second order for two jeans. And if I do it all in one session, then that becomes two, right, two divided by one. Is there clear any questions on this folks? Any questions anybody? Any questions? Cool, next, how do we define a session in the first place? So, again, this is the definition. Is there any document made to be document now? As per this definition, I have not even had a one session because I am not even logged in. But I have not logged in, right. So, I have not logged in, it shows me login or sign up. As per this definition, there is no session for no session in this world. And it was logged in log of. But that is the definition. Your definition session could be anyone kind of displacing an order, right. By any words, just visiting the app. That would be my session. Is that assumption in the matrix? Cool. And what is bound session? User LANs only on only one page and leaves. Let's say, what would have been a bound session for me? Let's say I have search minthera. I have kind of gone to this page and I then close the app. That means I have bound. I visited the page once and I moved out and I have left. This is not bound. So, I have the number of bound sessions that I have to go to the next session. So, do you think the bound session should be high or low? It should be low, right. I should not just visit and immediately leave. I should stay for some time and explore the app. So, my bound session should be high. Sorry, look. Is this clear? Any confusions in any of these metrics, any of these definitions? So, in an interview, you could be asked to kind of create your own metric issue to solve a problem. Any question, any doubts in this folks? Anyone? Cool. It's 245. Let's take a 5 minute break. We have 45 minutes in the session. Let's take a 5 minute break and we'll begin at 250. In the meantime, if anybody has any questions or if anybody wants to go out for water or rest room, then let us know. We'll start at around 250. Thank you. You You You You You You You You You Cool. Let's start with the next part, which is the user funnel journey. the general journey, so let me copy this and move it here. Right, so this is how something, you know, user through the computer, let's take a little bit of information. So first is the homepage, right, let's say I go to the home, let me search the home. I have landed on the home page, so this is where my journey starts, right, then search recommendation, let's say I can either search for a product or click on any of the recommendations, let's say I click on this, right, so this is the product page that opened, right, so this is the product page, so I started the homepage search recommendation and then landed a product page. Now, it will be three possible scenarios, I can either add a product, like anything I could add the product or I can simply do a buy now as well, let's say I click on this, I can click add to back or in some option there are also buy now, right, so it shows buy now, you will eventually go to the buy now page, so I can do either any of these two or I could simply go back to the homepage, so there are three possible scenarios, add to cart, buy now or I can go back to the homepage, if I click any of these two, it will be that I can make you check out, I can go to check out, let's say I had added to the back and now I can go to the checkout, this is the checkout page, next I can make the payments and place the order, so that's called a, this is called a user journey flow, right, like starting from a homepage to writing the payment stage, cool, so this is the, call the user journey flow, a basic flow chart, it could be more comprehensive than this, so this is sneaky diagram, across basically what could happen, this is more complex understanding of the user journey, like where did they come from, did they come from in the 7, I had said that it would be good, more than the next one, I said it's a bit random, I wanted to go to the one, I had a bit of good, it's a bit random, so I did I come on the mobile app, which is a test, can I see it can be being deleted, this kind of thing is going to stay in I got, so I got the wide add and high add to the official list, right, what did I do to 208, did I use, no I did not, I did not use the add, and then I can go to check out a bit, I can go to the other product, I can make a purchase, I can exit, I can go to the app, and that would be an exit, I can give a review also, right, so these are the various stocks, the required user journey, so we can add the mid-range, this is the idea, so is there any questions in these lines, are there any questions in these, so either the account or external ID, I can go to the mobile app, I can go to the official ID, so here I can go to the product and the reviews, I can go to the touch or handle, read reviews, or I could simply exit as well, right, this is the straight line after we are visiting, I could simply exit or like, open the app and just close it, it bounds also, so I can leave exit as well, these lines are just kind of showing me what the user path could do, possible user path, so this is all possible user paths, all possible user paths, any questions in this folks, so direct search would be, let's say from this bar, you see here 5.6 metre, that could be a direct search, organic search could be let's say I am I say certain Google, so that is I am searching on Google but organic need, add an external link could be let's say I saw an add on Instagram on Facebook or WhatsApp, so that could be it, is that clear? Any other question than you? By session, it means opening the app, browsing and closing it because if we go by the login user using app on mobile is always logged in so the session will only be completed if they log, so very good question, very good question, as I said, these are kind of definitions, as I said, these are assumptions, right, as but this assumption, we said that somebody log out, but when you do it, you said that in a mobile app, if you download the app and you can log in once, you are never going to log out, people just close the app, they do not log out, for example in the web, I can still make an argument if I try to clear my history, I can clear my cache, I might even log out, but in the app that does not happen, so the session will be defined as once the app open and once the app closed, so that could be a definition, as I said, these are assumptions, right, you can work with your team and figure out for a website, this could be a definition, but if the person is in the app, if you are going through the app, then the session will be open and open and close the app, so that could be the session definition, definitely that is possible. Is that clear? Who is Sarsita? Is she present? Cool, is that clear? Okay. Great, any other questions anyone? Any other questions anyone? Cool, now once you have understood the user journey, we can have estimated that, right, so the key is that the user is based on it and then you will be listed in the model also, you first have to know when to create a research project, so the facility for example, that of the 5% of the project will be signed. What was the original problem, right, what was the original problem? We started with this, that Mintra has observed that 3% of the project, we were able to start with the first thing, but then there was really 5% conversion, yes or no. So we are going to establish the baseline here, so this is sample letter I am creating, sample data. Let's say there were 100 sessions, about 7 is 10%, and it is 10% of the different 10 people that have opened up, it will be useful, this is the 10% of the data, so 10% was the boss data, non-boss sessions, I want to talk about the boss data, and it is 10% 1-1, 1-1, you will be there, 1-9, so the people that have gone about, right, the product is basically 10% of the non-boss kind of 100 people are non-boss session in the product session, I have got 50% in the product universe, so the remaining check out the investment period 6 and 10% of the time, it is due and it is extra-beauty. And the basic and the dividing, where it would not be produced is gone. So 90% of the users are the 90% customers, so 10% of the non-boss are the 90% of the non-boss 23%, so 90% of the people are at product age, 50% to 45% at 2%, so 25% is 75%, 75%, 30% and then 45%, sorry, 50% for the calculation, let's do this calculation. So these, we are basically creating a baseline of 5% that was originally given to us, right, so I have 100 customers, right, I am saying 10% is a bounce rate, so that means bounce customer at 10%, which is 10 customers, so non-bounce is how much, 90, then out of the non-bounce, 50% or 30% are landing on the product page, right, this is an assumption, so how many go to the product page, one-third, so that means 30 customers, so that means how many will go to the non-product page, 60 customers, then at 2% of the product, we will actually add to the card, right, 50% of the, again this is an assumption, at 2% of it, half of it, that is 15, that means how many do not add to card, remaining 15, checkouts is 12, payment is 6, so out of these add to card, 12 people go to check out, 3 drop off, like do not go to check out, and only 6 make the payments, do not make the payments, or let's say 6, go to the payment page, not payments, go to the payment page, right, in payment page, only 5 do the payment, one let's do does a COD, in the payments page you also get a cache on the library order option also, so let's say this is a confirm, this is still not confirmed, like this could be a COD order, right, COD is confirmed only when you end up gets the order and you make the payment, sort of these 5 are confirmed orders, 6 do not do the payment, so this is the breakdown, right, so my conversion is what, how many have actually confirmed orders 5, and how many users we have in the first place, 100, 5% is the conversion rate, so that's how you kind of derive the conversion rate, all the other stages like this, this is a drop off, here first people dropped off, here basically did not reach, so it could be considered a negative event, did not have to cut, did not check out, did not make the payment, this is still on hold, like this is not confirmed, when the user might receive the product, they could do a payment, or they could cancel midway also, it is not confirmed yet, so only 5 orders are confirmed, out of the 100 they are landed, so the conversion rate is actually 5 do add by 100, 5%, so that's how we kind of come to the baseline conversion rate, is this clear, any questions anyone, any questions, any doubts, anyone, cool, so now at every base, basically I am now creating a data frame out of it, so these are the columns that I am going to give, and these are basically the values, sessions, non-bounds, which we have created here, and finally, we are creating a percentage change, right, so this is how the step conversion looks like, the total session is 100, look the conversion is 1, because of 1,300 add at this stage, the non-bounds are 90% sessions, that means what is the step, and what you do, what you do, is 90%, that means what the data point is, from 1, you begin to 1, you begin to 1, it is a 25, minus 1, then 30, for the count, that means 66.67 drop of, so that means minus 0.67, then how much is d, so minus 0.5, for here, minus 0.2, basically the percentage drop that is happening at every stage, at every stage what is the drop happening, is that clear? So, from here, 0.1 drop happened, then 0.67 drop happened, then 0.5, 0.2, 0.5, finally 0.167, with respect to the previous step, is this clear, any doubts on this? So, if we are starting at 100%, then drop to 90%, that is a 10% drop, then 66.6% drop over the previous stage, 50% drop over the previous stage, 20% drop over the previous stage, 50% drop over the previous stage, 16.7 over the previous stage, so how much is the percentage go down at every stage? Is that here, any questions, anyone? Any questions on this calculation of the code? Cool, I will take that as your question then. Yeah, so again, I am taking your little things that have taken the above numbers or assumptions, these are not really data, this is just the assumption that I made to explain you the concepts. So, this was kind of backtracking the user journey. Now, we look at since confirm, models are downed by 2% reports, we have been told that 3% is not 3%, now let us kind of look at the possible causes that include. So, dropping the total users per session per day, what could be basically causes? Drop and total users sessions per day. That is, people are no less, so people are opening them in 3% or drop in total session as we discussed, it could be app opening, a session could be defined as app opening or as per previous stage, but it would be longer than longer. So, whatever the definition is, as per the definition, there is a drop in that number, people are opening the app less. That could be one possible, people are opening the app open the app less, immediately found that it is, one person suddenly leave, and then it is that you might have made in the app. So, if a browser doesn't please, you just not proceeding past the product page, see the one-year product page, but they don't move to the checkout stage, the app you can't change. It means probably they are not liking the product, for example, let's say if you have opened this page, casual search, you explored all the app, all the product, but you did not go beyond this, you did not go beyond the product, right? Let's say you spend five to ten minutes scrolling through the app, but let's say you closed it after me. That means probably you did not like the product, right? So, that is users not proceeding past the product page. People are not liking the product, maybe we need to improve the inventory, we need to add more different styles and designs that are more trendy design that people are liking these things. This is what we wanted to do. It could be a case that there is a glitch in the app, I am not able to add the product to the time, right? So, there is something wrong with the button. That could be one possible case. Issues during checkout of the page, I have a need to issue checkout page, but I am trying to make the payment, let's say Google page not working, or PTM is not working, or let's say most of the people in India pay using the API, and somehow the API is part of the same thing. There is no way to make API names, right? So, this comes with an issue during checkout of the page, this could be some of the issues. So, that's how you are going to identify it, because there could be more, when you are going to revising your stuff, I will try to get some more possible causes that could be there. These are some of the examples that I have added. Is there any questions in this? Any questions, any doubts? But you see the whole point, right? So, there you need to apply a raw internet, right? So, it's the same thing, you know. You have to apply your data. There is no programming that I can teach you there. I can show you some examples, but you have to come up with your own thoughts, right? I cannot do that for you. So, it's more like brainstorming on your own, being analysis on your own, playing on the data on your own. Is this an example of how you can do that? There can be multiple elements, right? There can be multiple elements, which are positive and identified. These are some of them. Is that clear? Anyone has any questions, hooks? Any questions, anyone? I'll take a pause here and ask. Cool. So, let's say you got the data from a stakeholder. And you got the H2M. Overuse and empty. Because gets eliminated, right? Drop in total users is that kind of gets eliminated? I forgot how to do that. So, let's cross this out. So, this one is crossed out. Because the answer is no decline. Traffic is normal. Bound state has also not increased. We're going to remove this from the scope. Product page average rating. 3.8 to 4.2 across categories. Unchanged. That means product page is also, product dislike is also not the reason. These are like the standard rating that we have. And this has unchanged. Expected delivery. This could be another reason. So, this is also unchanged. Discounts, 20 to 45%. Discounts have also not changed. So, which old questions are left remaining to answer? So, these are, this is what we got from our stakeholders. Out of using this, we have tried of three, three of the possible reasons. So, how many are we left with? The last two. We have identified five new causes. We have common stakeholders in the network order. We can strike out the reports to the, so, between the sessions, I'm not going to use. Now, I'm saying, it's not going to be. But it is still as it was available. When it was, I can say. So, now, we have to move into. Use as a required, I have to call issues. We're in checkout stage. So, conclusions over. The issue likely has in the last six, but I have to call checkout or make payment. Right. So, now, we will apply the, the, the, the, the framework that we identified. Usually, the client file, however, you know, a second question that says. So, some of the questions that you can ask. External factors. Any upcoming stage, or pattern or actual, which is a comedy, let's say, if a geo is running a sale, why would people go to Mintra, they get the same products on AGO. Right. They could go there. You would be always social media, majority of the coverage, but the thing is, it's happening is possible. So, as per our stakeholders, we don't know what's happening inside. It's on the social media. They're running a sale. They might be running some campaigns. That they're sending directly on the email or the push notifications. But there is nothing available to social media. Demographic details. So, you can ask about the demographies of the customer. Is that the client? The client is the client. What about the customer? In particular, the capacity. You know, as I spread across many regions, many locations, it's not in a particular city. Let's say it's not in Bangalore, it's all over the India. Any specific gender or age group that it has been affected, like it's a demographies, let's talk about it, called, you know, you can't get any of the color or anything like that. So, let's drop and reform the student cross-groups. All the genders, all the age groups, have started to place less orders. Any macroeconomic or supply chain issues? We said, part of the data is only for the manufacturers. Mithra does not own their own inventory. There's selling products for like, any other, who are the brands. So, have the suppliers kind of stop giving us brand new products? Or they are kind of, any group of partnership, it is there. Some of the marketer could not let's say, what do you say? Let's say it 90 per example. I'll give you a repulsion. Have the sort of sale of the product, like, did you put out, are the items, how much stock, anything like that? So, the last thing that you've said is, majority of products are in stock. So, the thing is, like, this happened. And majority of products are still in stock. Products, last thing we asked, any app changes the review? Any recent changes, the brand, the ad features. So, last thing is this, certain things will be product in the last few days. So, what would be your guess? What would have caused the decline in the orders? Out of the questions that you had asked, what do you think, what would have caused the issue? What would have possibly caused the issue? What issue could have been the reason? So, the answer to all of the questions that you had asked was, you know, right? Only one question has the answer, yes. So, that means, something in the app that is available, something, from a brand available, you have, is possibly causing these orders to, you know, drop off. So, you need to look into that, what change was available? What would have changed? I have hampered some other, but an argument or checkout button. So, this is where you would start investigating this, because all the questions are, no, the only thing that you left with, yes, suddenly, I have been going to the last few days. I will start, this is the drop only in the last few days, right? So, something would be related to this. When you start investigating, whether it was related to the only thing, right? You have the final back-back in the answers, where we are going to investigate this. You would investigate this in the app changes that were made. Now, we are going to ask further questions about, the app changes. Now, because we had identified, right? There could be issues with, I took out checkout or make payment. So, these were the three stages where the problem could exist. And you're stakeholder said, yes, the app changes were made. So, we were going to take aim, whether it was a problem. To be honest, the question, are there any changes in the app kind of checkout? So, the answer is, do the whole thing participate? The company is talking pro-chase. Check out what was your proof for a seamless exchange? However, the case was in a design of, I, I took out a list of the information. So, wherever the app took out button existed earlier, it's still at the same place. That means, app took out is not the only issue. Because app took out is where it was supposed to be. So, there is no change there. Next question. Bug reports for the new update, not 20 years. I said, that will be worse than the report. There are no bugs or anything. There's no restriction. Missing any payment budget in statures of the Google Pay Stadium, are we still showing that? That said, yes, no. No, PDR will be the biggest of the data. Nothing is missing there. Any payment database or payment database or payments or a payment or a payment database? Resurpey, very good. So, when you make a payment, like you would have, let's say if you have ever made a payment or a payment or a payment or any other platform, you would see that Google Pay can read the next few to reserve payment, there's a payment, payments, things like that. So, there's a page, comes that should reserve, that allow the transaction in the network of a bank or a bank or a bank or a bank. Right? So, they let you, they are the infrastructure behind those payments. So, the answer to question are payment payments going from me? Yes, a page, you see some cash source, there's a shoe at the end of page, you can check out. That means, Resurpey, or any of the partners that are payment-candered, they are not working properly. Due to the customer, they are not able to make payments. So, discussion from the card addition still happens in the customer's work as well, what I want to reserve is a school. People are seeing a network of other people with any products, but they're facing issues with payment payments. So, the best hypothesis could be, that there are certain payment related issues, people are not able to make payments. Right? Now, we will further dig deep into data. Let's explore the payment issues in detail. Server downtime. So, these are some of the payment banks basically. Right? Sometimes, when you make payment, you notice that there is a notification, your banks are not working. Things like that. So, what did you notice on the start? What did you notice on the start? Yellow is a previously purple is the current pink. Server downtime, let the server is not working. What do you notice? Right. So, three of the major banks are getting ICA, ICA, and SCFC. They're having, look at that, they have ICA, they're making a pathway. They're in significant server downtime. That means they are not working. Their bank servers are not working. So, people are not able to make payments because of these banks are, bank servers are not working properly. So, this is your root cause of why your orders are going down. Confirmed orders are going down. Basically. So, what are the conclusions? Three out of five partening banks, services providing payment option with the ICA, frequent issues, and high server downtime and the time peak. This weather is just one of the things about income because ICA is extremely dangerous. If you make a face, when the weather dies, that's what you're not going to see. Right? So, it's a two times, you see that your payment is not completed. You'll not make a third time, right? People get scared. I mean, please money, I'm not going to even get the order. So, let's talk basic orders. So, what is the reason? Please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, please, I knew that I tried to跟합니다 this, and that I tried file this, but I left it what I bought商,it's a agriculture app? things like that. So these are some off-flow questions. You can take this as a homework right to answer them. Is there any questions folks? Any questions in this whole analysis? Were you able to understand the whole process? So these analysis you will have to do in a 1 hour or a 45 minute interview with an interviewer. If let's say you go for such a role. So this is how you kind of start and read the root cause. So in product manager, product analytics rounds, this is specifically one hour interview that kind of deals deep down into the root cause of analysis. So the one which I am understanding whether you are able to break down the problem and reach the possible root cause or not. So that's how you have to drive the conversation right. Ask the right question, make the clarification. Try to rule out the scopes that are not not not going to be possible and try to reach a conclusion. Is that clear? Any questions anyone there? Is everything understood? Cool. I would assume that as a yes if no questions now let me also start your assignment. I don't think there's any assignment for this class. No assignments for this. But yeah, so that was all about it. I'm open to questions if anybody has any questions. If not, we can go to the 10th and 10th page. Second and second. Any questions anyone? Quiz timing. The dates are not finalized yet probably next week only after the last class. But quiz class 12th. Maybe before that or maybe after that dates are not finalized yet, but it will be any time next week. Cool. I would take that as no question then. I mean and um yes. Can anything. you you