Hi everyone, am I audible to all of you? Can everybody give me a thumbs up if I'm audible to all of you present in this session? Yes, super. So in the last session we talked about indexing. Why is there a need of concept called indexing? What are the different? Attributes that are auto indexed in the table, how do we create an index in a table, multi-valued or multi-attribute indexes? Today we're going to move on into a completely different topic, which is going to be talking about another aspect of using a database in the real world, using SQL queries in the real world. So we're going to start with a simple example of a task that requires SQL queries database updates for its completion. Okay. So what are we going to talk about in today's session? In today's session these are the following topics that we will be discussing. First being by transaction exists, the definition of a transaction, the different transactions, states or the different commands and transactions in the different states in the transaction, the quantities of transaction which is acid, we're going to do an overview and look at each of the possibilities. Then what are the problem statements that occurs in a database because of concurrency, different types of isolation levels in the real world application. The next session is going to be a complete lap simulation of different types of isolation levels. We're going to create a concurrent environment, we're going to create situations where we will deal with different types of isolation levels. Everybody, a thumbs up first to follow the agenda of the session makes sense to all of you present in the lecture. Okay. Now everyone, if I talk about why a concept like transaction is required or what is a situation where we even need to think of a concept like transaction, if I talk about a very simple example, bank transfer. In bank transfer, let's say what we have is, I use once to transfer 10,000 to Hershey okay. We have an account stable. Again right now I'm assuming it's a same bank transfer. It's a transfer within the same bank. If it's an interbank transfer then it will involve other attributes, APA calls and all of that as well. The account stable, I have account balance. The initial value of the account, I use has 50,000 in his account and Hersheyth has 20,000 in his account. Okay. Now if I use once to transfer 10,000 to Hersheyth account, what are the SQL queries that we will need to execute to perform this task everyone or how many SQL queries do you think we will need to execute to perform this task? Everybody present in the session can you answer in the chat how many SQL queries will I need to execute in order to perform this task? Two SQL queries have to execute to perform this task right. What is the first SQL query that I will execute? The first SQL query that I will execute is update accounts set balance equal to balance minus 10,000 where account ID is equal to I use your account name is equal to I use. So what this will do is this will reduce I use account balance to 40,000. Now what I will have to do? Now what I will have to do is I will have to run another query where I will say update account set balance equal to balance plus 10,000 where the account ID is equal to Hersheyth. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes. So there are two SQL queries, bit of and let's say what happens is you start the bit you run the debit operation you run the debit SQL query and then the system crashes the power goes off something goes wrong and the credit operation is not exact. If the first query has become 40,000 but because the second system crashes the first query Hersheyth balance still remains 20,000. Can you give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. What has happened now? 10,000. Ropees has disappear. Where it is I don't know it just appeared from the system which made this inconsistent database incorrect. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Now my question to all present in the session is is that we write the SQL queries in the SQL queries written to execute this on to the SQL query. Then what will correct SQL queries but the first operation of not come I think that was lighted in the system in nature database hebans perspective what would So, what is the solution to this? Yes will get done, should happen to happen, right, this should not be tolerated execution or partially completed time. If I talk about it, right? Can I see that? That will be to reserve a seat meaning a ticket to process the payment. Now here is well-earned. Why? Take a booking. It is generated for the user, but the payment. Does the seat, if the payment fails? Does the individual get the ticket payment? Yes, also. The individual is operational. Or one of them, of course, he present in the session. How many? The person is in the order. And then I move to the payment space. The first thing that happens is the moment I place the order. I even click on proceeding the order is they reduce the inventory by one. If there is only one item available, two people do not purchase that one item at the same time. Other person does not get to purchase the same item. But what happens if you place the order, reduce the inventory, but the payment fails. And there is no mechanism to go back or roll back the entire partially executed queries. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if all of you are able to under. He present in the session the thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Yes, so in a lot of real world examples, in a lot of real world software is right. What we would need to do is we would need to run a bunch of SQL queries together. Where either all of those SQL queries needs to be executed or none of them needs to be executed. If there is anything that fails in the middle, I need to go back to the previous state before the first SQL query was executed to make sure that the system remains consistent. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. And this is valid everywhere in the hospital, in a UPI transaction, in a ticket booking, in any examination. Not mine. Who is this? Sorry. Yes, I understand. Who wants to get down with me? What is happening? Come on. Okay. Now, what we have seen is we have seen that multiple SQL queries executes together. So here if I talk about the bank, sorry, up till now what we have seen is we just execute individual SQL queries. We have not seen a way to bundle multiple SQL queries together. Now here everyone, if I execute this particular debit query, update accounts set balance equal to balance minus 10,000 where account is equal to I use. If this query executes in the second query, fails to go back to the previous state before the partial execution should I run another query where I would say update accounts at balance equal to balance plus 10,000 where account ID is equal to I use. Should that be the approach that we should be taking everyone to solve this or to build a solution for this. Is the problem statement making sense? The problem statement that I am talking about is if there is a business operation that involves multiple SQL operations multiple SQL queries if it stops partially. Right. Should I write backup queries for each and every query that changes the transition or that changes the database? Yes or no, everyone? Yes. How many of you think that should be the solution that we should expect or that should be the solution that exists for this particular problem statement? For your experience from what you worked as software engineers or for building anything, have you always seen a backup query written for any SQL query that this is updating the balance in positive. So, I should have a backup query to update the balance in negative. No, right. That is not how real world system operates. So, what is the solution for a problem statement like this? The solution for a problem statement like this exists through concept which is called as a transaction. What is a transaction, everyone? A transaction is a sequence of one or more database operation that together performs a single logical unit of work. For example, in the banking example, we had a debit operation and a credit operation. Both of them when combined together performs a single business logic, single unit of work which is transfer X amount of money from user A to user B. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the session. Yes. Now, a single unit of business operation or a single logical unit of work, an example for that can be a ticket booking which involves multiple SQL operations, right. Balance transfer, money transfer, multiple SQL operations involved, right. So, airline any sort of reservation, any sort of booking system, multiple operations involved, right. Creating a new user onto a platform, multiple operations involved, right. Now, what you need to understand is that a transaction is not defined by the number of SQL operations that are involved in that transaction. A transaction is defined by a unit of work. A transaction should exhaustively cover a unit of work. Any number of SQL operations required for that unit of work will become a part of that transaction. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. So, one single operation can also be called as a transaction if that single SQL operation completes a unit of work, a single logical unit of work. Now, why database transaction, the reason why database needs to answer is because servers are posted on machines and there are a lot of reasons why machines can fail power failure, server crash, there can be a network failure, there can be an application bug, there can be any sort of any hardware failure, there can be concurrency issue because on the most common ones, a con. Right. And that can lead to partial updates. That is what we need to avoid and solution for doing that will be using a transaction. Now, everyone for you to understand transaction, there is one very important step that you need to understand. Which is whenever we are executing a database query right, whenever we execute a SQL query, there is a setting in SQL which is called as auto commit. By default, when we run just SQL onto a server's auto commit is generally on what auto commit means is. So, the process of execution of a SQL query is whenever you run a SQL query, your changes are not directly made onto your hard disk. Your changes are first stored in a temporary file and when a commit is made is when the changes are finally made on the hard disk as well. Before you make the commit, if the database stops, then those changes will not be saved permanently on everybody. So, for example, give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Generally, for the SQL that we run, the SQL server, my SQL server that we run, for single queries, the auto commit is generally set to on. Which means that the moment you execute a SQL query, the changes are permanently copied onto the hard disk as well. But that is how the real world systems work. Real world systems generally keep the auto commit to we build transactions for business operations and we perform a commit on to the actual disk only when the entire transaction has completed. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes a present in the session meaning when these individual SQL operations are being executed, these changes will be saved on a temporary file. And the moment where all of the SQL queries have been executed is where those changes will finally be copied onto the actual hard disk and that is where they will become permanent changes. Right. Super. Now, because of the combination of multiple SQL operations, right. For a database to identify what SQL queries are a part of a transaction, a logical transaction must have these three things. What first a beginning. Second some SQL operations. One or many and third an ending. The reason why there should be a beginning and ending added is for database to identify that all of the SQL queries between this beginning and ending are a part of a single business unit, single business operation or are a part of a single transaction. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no. Yes. So your basic transaction structure generally looks like this. Start a transaction. SQL statement one. SQL statement two. SQL statement three or multiple SQL statements and then finally commit. Comet is what tells your database that the transaction is complete now. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no. Comet is what tells your database that whatever changes that you have made in the sequence of these SQL queries. Please copy those changes to the actual hardest and make them permanent changes that transaction has been completed. Whereas there is one more workflow in your SQL transactions which is. Start transaction. SQL statement one. SQL statement two. SQL statement three. And then roll back. What does roll back means? Roll back is a condition that is used in case if the transaction was partially executed. If there was any issue during the execution of the transaction for example. If the SQL statement one got executed two got executed but then the system crashed. The SQL statement three was not executed then we make a call to the roll back function which will go back to the beginning of the transaction. Which will not commit the changes made by SQL statement one and SQL statement two to the actual hardest. These changes will not be made permanent they will be discarded. That is what your roll back statement does. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no. Where the most important line is that the database does not permanently apply the changes immediately. This is what we need to understand. Changes remain a part of the current transaction until the transaction finishes. This is very very important for us to understand. No. Let me put something. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So what I have is I have a simple user account table in which we have to present it. Okay. So what I have done is by default my SQL has auto commit on. I have just turned auto commit equal to zero meanings. Now the SQL queries that I will execute will not be auto committed on to the table immediately. Okay. Okay. Okay. Account balance is equal to account balance minus 10 000. Where? Name is equal to take proper SQL query. But here now I am saying that query okay one row affected rows matched one changed one warnings. What do you think will be the value of the account balance present in the user account table right now? Everyone what do you think will be the value of the account balance present inside the user account table now? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. What is the value of the balance that we are able to see everyone for 1000 right. But my question to all of you present in the session is do you think this change is permanent on to the database? Do you think this change is permanent on to the yes or no everyone no let us see. What is the value of the balance right now? 50 000 meaning whenever the auto commit is off right whatever SQL query that we execute roll back is not a control Z button you have to understand. Rollback can only undo the changes that have not been permanently committed to the database now let me execute the same set of queries again. I am going to again update the balance of I use I am going to reduce the value by 10 000. But after this what I am simply going to do is I am going to make a commit here. Okay. When I make a commit here and I use the select star I am able to see the balance of 40 000. But let us try to do a rollback now. If I do a rollback now and look at the balance the balance not gets reset to 50 000 meaning only when a commit is made on to the changes that you have made. The changes that you have done is where those changes becomes permanently written on to the hardest otherwise those changes are stored temporarily into your tempiles and are not permanent. So if anything happens in between if anything happens between a SQL query execution and it's commit right then changes also gets lost that is another reason for us to be using transaction as a concept right. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. I know we have not discussed commits as of now in any of the sessions but this is the first time we are introducing commit and the concept that sequels queries when executed are not permanent on to the hardest right now let me change the. Now let's talk about a SQL transaction how does a transaction works so the first statement in the transaction is to start a transaction. Then the first SQL statement update user account set account equal to account balance minus 1000 where name is equal to I use great then the second SQL statement update user account set account balance equal to account balance plus 10 000 where the name is equal to Harsha. Right now let me look at the table once I use account balance has been reduced by 10 000 from 40 000 Harsha account balance has been increased by 10 000 from 20 000 but are these changes permanently moved to the database are these changes permanent on to the DB no these are not only when I call the commit is when this transaction ends. And those changes are permanently copied on to the database otherwise let's say what we do is again let me start a transaction then let me transfer another from I use to Harsha money directed from I use account you can check the account stable. Let me add the money to Harsha account money added to Harsha account let's check the table great and now for some reason there are more operations needs to be executed but the system crashes here my connection to the database server is lost. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to just call rollback and when I call rollback you can see that the both the SQL operations the changes made by both of the SQL operations were removed were discarded can everybody give me a thumbs up if what transaction as a concept is make sense to all of you present in the session a thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present here everyone please let me know if there's anything that is not clear about trans actions I'll be happy to explain again. Even not happy with the responses I would appreciate everybody to give me a thumbs up if this is clear to all of you a thumbs down if this is not making sense to anybody present in the session great. So there are 10 files where this copy of this table and again not just the copy of the entire table only the affected rows are so only the changes that you made are being stored right whenever you will do a commit is where those changes will actually be made onto the server for example how get works right we clone the branch. We clone the branch of it we work on that particular branch or for us the until which happens the changes will not be made permanently onto the central repository think of it like that not exactly like that because it's a file based architecture so there are some temp files where the changes are being stored before fetching the actual table the SQL will first go to those temp files to see if there are any changes because you can see right even though these changes are not committed in my local session if I'm fetching the data. From a table I am seeing the change the data correct but I do have the capability of rolling that back until unless a commit has been made once a commit is made those changes are permanent you cannot roll back those changes you will have to execute a sequel query in order to make any change after that right so very important point to note here is that a commit is permanent Now next question that I have for all of you present in the session is there are two different workflows present here the first workflow that is present here is that you started transaction you execute the statement one statement to statement three everything goes when you commit the transaction the second is you start a transaction you execute a couple of sequel queries something fails and then you have to do a roll back but how do I cater to this workflow is what I want to understand from you how do you think sequel handle this work how do you think sequel because sequel is what is crashing right it is the server that crashes it is the server that we have lost the connection with right so how will the server know whether we have to do a roll back or whether we have to do a commit anybody have any answers to this question this is where you have to understand that a transaction is not completely executed by the database themselves right a transaction is usually implemented in your application layer a transaction is what sits in your back end you have whenever there is a requirement of executing a sequel command from your back end on to the sequel server you will rapid a visit transaction in your code for example if you're working in Java I can show you a sample of a Java file where a transaction is present but we don't need that so in your Java file how this is going to work is we are first going to have one command that is going to send a start transaction command on to the sequel server then one by one we are going to send all of those sequel queries that we want to execute to the sequel server and all of this will be wrapped inside a tri-catch statement how many if you understand what a tri-catch statement is how many if you understand what an exception is okay so all of this is wrapped inside a tri-catch statement or all of this is wrapped in a wrapper which will catch if anything goes wrong and then we have if else conditions that if everything goes right then make a sequel command for commit if everything if anything fails then make a command to roll back so a transaction is not something that we can execute only on the sequel server we need a database to support sorry we need a database to support sorry we need a back end to support a transaction right now here you see the way I have executed a transaction is by just assuming that oh this is the first query that will be run this is the second query that we will run then the third query then this is the fourth query is query and then we will do a roll back no there is actual logic that exists for this in our back end which ensures that multiple sequel queries executes as a transaction to them everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of your thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the session where would we learn that you will learn that as a part of your spring no you okay so next we are going to talk about a very simple topic which is transaction states okay so transaction states is basically the name given to the different stages okay so the first transaction state is active where this is the state in which the transaction is the moment you make the command start transaction everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session this is the state where your sequel queries are being executed okay next second is partially committed so this is the state of your transaction where all the sequel queries have been executed but the state statement has not been made those equal execution or those query updates have been on to the hardest now you even tell me if all of the sequel queries are executed where your see a transaction is in a partially committed state and the failure happens when you will turn on the system when you will connect with the data is again will you find those changes present on to the hard disk no until unless the final commit has been made until unless your transaction moves from a partially committed state to a committed state the changes are not reflected permanently on to the database other execution of a sequel queries if anything fails or even in the partially committed state of anything fails and after that what we do is we move on to the abode state where we call the rollback function can everybody give me a thumbs up if all of the transaction states make sense to all of you present in the session yes or no again just name that you need to remember so that you're able to answer any questions if ever asked in the interviews now everyone if this makes sense to all of you let's move on to an actual understanding where we are going to be talking about the properties of a transaction properties of transaction which is called as acid properties so there are four properties of transactions we're going to discuss each and every one of them one by one most important one being isolation right where we will even go into the details of isolation to understand why isolation is a property is required for a transaction okay now starting with the first one a where a stands for atomicity okay what does atomicity means the word atomic comes from the idea that something cannot be broken down into smaller part so atomicity is the property for transaction that ensures that a transaction is treated as a single indivisible unit meaning if you have some sequel operations and then you have some other transactions wrapped inside a transaction either all the operations of the transaction executes successfully or none of them execute the present in the session can you give me a thumbs up with the property number one which is a tomacity of a transaction makes sense to all of you present in the session this is the reason why we even thought of a so that multiple c queries which are a part of a single business operation can run together either all of them or none of them at all all the 50 70 80 people present in the session a thumbs up if this is clear to all of you thumbs down if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody present in the session yes now how is atomicity ensure atomicities ensured using your commit and rollback commands where only when all of the sequel queries have been executed we make a commit if anything fails we make a rollback to go back to the state of the database before the complete transaction begins super now the second property of the transaction is consistency and this is the one that is the most comfy using to understand anybody here can you explain to me what consistency means in relation to database and transactions anybody any idea on what consistency means anybody anybody like explaining what consistency might mean no missing data everybody right take it consistency is the property of a transaction that ensures that a transaction moves the database from one valid state to another valid state for example if I go back to my banking example right in my banking example if I see the total money present in the bank is 70,000 now no matter how many operations I do how many transfers I perform within this bank can I say at the end of the data total money present with all the account holders should be 70,000 that is only when the database will be valid if for any reason the account balance of one of the users got deducted but the other user did not get a credit in that case what is going to happen is that there is money that is going to disappear from your bank the database state is not consistent the database state is not valid and that is the property that is what consistency ensures consistency ensures that a transaction always moves the database from one valid state to another now the valid state is not just about property like balance the valid state is also about all the constraints that are imposed on to the database all the business rules that are imposed on to the database for example let's say if we have a college database where we are keeping a track of the CGP of the students we know that the maximum value of a CGP 10 right so if in a transaction any sequel query makes the value of the CGP for a student greater than 10 we cannot call that a consistent transaction why because according to the business rules there is a violation that is present in that transaction can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session don't worry we are going to see a person to understand consistency better so consistency does not mean that the data never changes the data is supposed to change consistency simply means that rules are never violated so now for example if let's say age is an attribute is present for any particular user and after a transaction the age becomes minus 5 for that particular user the database consistent the transaction executes successfully every month no right after the transaction ends the age of this student should be positive should be greater than or equal to 0 which is why the database is not in a consistent state this is a consistency violation right now let's talk about what a valid state means so for a valid state first of all all the constraints present inside the tables should be satisfied okay along with that all the business rules whether imposed on to the tables are not should be satisfied and the third is all the relationships remains correct everybody present in the session a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no now the biggest question is how can database become inconsistent why can database become inconsistent and I am going to give you a very simple example of why database becomes inconsistent we will talk a little bit more about that in isolation right which will tell you that if isolation is executed on to this consistent for majority of the instances right so let's say what we're doing is I have an account in a schtfc my account balance is 50,000 right now or let's say my account balance is 10,000 right now and 80 and I want to withdraw 8,000 rupees from the 80 and I put my card and I enter the pen okay I dial the amount I put mountain which is 8,000 I click enter transaction is being executed time I opened Google page I checked my it still shows 10,000 I did a transfer of 8,000 rupees to let's say let's say Harshan so what is the situation right now the situation right now is I use has 10,000 rupees it is account okay now I use goes to an ATM to withdraw 8,000 rupees okay ATM sends a request to check if balance is greater than or equal to 10,000 okay what will the ATM receive now how much true the ATM will receive a true that the balance is greater than equal to 8,000 sorry which means 8,000 can be withdrawn now ATM sends a request to deduct 8,000 from the balance right but while this is happening what I do is I use makes a UPI transfer of 5,000 to Harshan okay ATM check for the balance the balance was correct I get it got through the and the cash can be dispersed now it's under request to the server to reduce the balance by 8,000 but while this was happening I made a UPI transfer to Harshan for 5,000 okay when I made a UPI transaction to Harshan for 5,000 what will be the value of my balance can I say the remaining balance will be 5,000 now the ATM sends a request to deduct 8,000 from the balance what will be the value of the balance minus 3000 can the value of the balance ever be minus 3000 well ideally that is a very different situation that is only exceptional situation where banks allow that withdrawing the money can be done right up your balance becomes negative when you have a card due or a loan due whose case the bank make sure balance to be negative but in this type of situation if you have 10,000 rupees in your account will you ever be able to withdraw 13,000 rupees from your account everybody present in the session yes or no no so can I say this leads to the database in an inconsistent all the 50 people present in the session 100 people present in the session a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present here yes so a transaction must ensure that a database remains consistent something like this should not happen okay there can be multiple reasons why inconsistency can be present in the database now some of the biggest reasons for inconsistencies present in the database is for example for a relational inconsistency why a date why an inconsistency gets introduced into the system is where people forget to add a print reference it would add a foreign key reference into your tables right for example you have a user ID account you have a profile ID account right profiles are created for the users so in the profile ID table you will have an account ID as a foreign key if you don't add a foreign key constraints in the profiles table somebody can come and add profiles for a user that does not even exist in the system right so that is why ensuring foreign keys always present whenever there's a relationship make sure that relational inconsistencies can never happen in the database right this type of inconsistency can be avoided by the balance right meaning that the balance check that the balance always has to be greater than or equal to zero now if that sort of a check is introduced what will happen what will happen here is that whenever the ATM will send a request to deduct 8000 rupees from the balance this sequel query will fail because this will violate the consistency check and when this sequel query fails the entire transaction will this is not of that transaction this particular transaction will be rolled back and the user will not be able to withdraw 8000 rupees from the ATM right now what was the problem that led to this particular inconsistency happening here everyone everyone what was the reason for this inconsistency why was the user able to withdraw or send 5000 rupees from the UPI even though the bank knew that 8000 of that 10000 is already been requested by the ATM why did this happen can I say this is happening because multiple transactions are simultaneously trying to access the same table the same records present in the database can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no so a UPI transfer online verification right cash withdrawal all of this is happening at the same time multiple transactions are trying to modify or fetch data from the same table for the same record at the same time and that is why we are in like that is why those transactions are leading the database to an inconsistent state so what is the biggest problem that happens to people users try to read or modify the same data simultaneously this is one of the biggest examples for that the challenge is not executing one transaction right the challenge is executing many transactions at the same time without corrupting the data and that is what isolation ensures isolation ensures that concurrent transactions do not interfere with each other isolation ensures that concurrent transaction do not interfere with each other meaning meaning each transaction behaves as it should be but if one transaction is already accessing some resource in the database isolation makes sure that the resource is not available to the other transactions to use at the same time depending on which isolation strategy has been used or implemented in your system can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session meaning when a transaction is being executed right a transaction should behave in a way that for the database it understands that this is the only transaction that is executing at the given time multiple transactions are not trying to modify the data at the same time one example for that we have seen is the banking example where if multiple transactions update the same data this happens now do not talk Isolation logs is one of the most important topics of databases. In the next session, we will talk about different types of isolation strategies and we will implement those isolation strategies as well to see what each individual isolation strategy does to the database. Now, why does isolation or why is isolation required? Isolation is required because of concurrency. What is concurrency? Concurrency simply means multiple transactions executing at the same time. Multiple transactions trying to access the same data at the same time. This can happen because of multiple users, multiple ATMs, multiple cashiers, multiple food orders, multiple UPI transfers. So multiple things can interact with the same table, same entry, same record at the same time. Now, the biggest problem is one possible solution for this might be, hey, don't even allow consistency. But think of a system like Book My Show where there is one state or one ticket and multiple people are trying to access that particular seat, that particular ticket. Should we restrict the users not to be able to do that? No, we cannot do that. Let's look at IRCTC. IRCTC, whenever the portal opens, there are thousands of users trying to book the same ticket. Now, imagine one ticket being allocated to multiple people in the chaos that it is going to create. That is why isolation is a property present in your databases, in your transactions to make sure that at one time, if one user is trying to book a ticket, other users are not allowed to book the same ticket, book the same record, modify the same entry into the database. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? Yes or no? Yes. Now, again, the point, overall, when we look at the operation, although I know that individually, if there are multiple users trying to book ticket at the same time, right? One way to do that is I give everyone a sequential order and I just make them book the ticket in the sequential order. But that is going to make the system very, very slow. I need to be able to support multiple people trying the book tickets at the same time. I just need to make sure that there is isolation present for one individual seat in the system. Whenever a user selects a seat, that seat gets isolated for that particular user. Either the booking will complete. If the booking does not get completed, roll back and add it to the pool of seats that is available for others to book. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session. Yes. So the goal, the main goal of isolation is to ensure or to create an illusion that each transaction is running alone. That is the entire purpose of isolation as a concept. Okay? Isolation aims to create the illusion that each transaction is running alone, even though thousands of transactions may be executing simultaneously. Thank you. So, everyone I will just take 2 minutes I will take a step back and I will introduce isolation again in a little bit of more simpler. What is a transaction? A transaction is a sequence of SQL operations that needs to be executed for a business operation to complete Q. Now, your transactions of multiple SQL queries that are going to modify the data present in the databases. Now, there can be multiple transactions of the same type running at the same time meaning for example, if we talk about a movie ticket booking system right movie ticket booking system can have multiple users trying to book ticket in the same theater on the same seat at the same time. Can everybody give me a yes of this makes sense to all of you present in the session or if I just take a step back movie ticket booking can be multiple users are trying to book a ticket for the same movie. Let us remove the seat part. Now, isolation is a property that ensures that no two users book the same ticket same seat at the same time. So, one ticket or one seat is allocated to one transaction one user that is what the property of isolation ensures. Isolation is the property that says that transactions do not interfere with each other. How will isolation ensure that isolation ensures that by introducing the concept of locks? What can be the problem that might happen in the ticket booking system the problem that might happen in the ticket booking system or the money transfer system is that multiple people are or multiple transactions are trying to view and update the balance of a user at the same time. What will locks do? Locks will ensure that the first transaction that started until unless that transaction is complete depending on which lock you have implemented on to the table on to the database right will restrict the other transactions to accessing the same data only when the transaction is complete is where another transaction will be able to access the same data or modify the same data. So, how isolation is executed is a completely different story. The bigger part is for us to understand what exactly is isolation which is the property that ensures that two transactions do not intersect with each other or do not interrupt each other. Everybody present not interfere with each other. All the hundred people present in the session are thumbs up if isolation is a property makes sense to all of you present in the session. Now isolation is not a binary property that there is isolation there is isolation there are different levels of isolation. What are the different levels of isolation that we have to talk about and simulate? The first is read uncommitted. Second is read committed third is repeatable read and fourth is serializable. So, in today session we are going to discuss each and every one of these one by one. Before we do that we will first talk about the last property of transactions AIC, AIC, AIC, AIC have already discussed. The last is durability which is again simply a property that says that once a transaction has been committed those changes are permanent onto the HUD. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session AIC or no? Meaning you should only say that a transaction is complete after the final commit statement has been executed after those changes have permanently been saved onto the HUD. Once those changes are taken safe even after that is the system crashes and when you reconnect to the server again those changes will still be present into the database. The database will be the updated version that we want to see. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if durability is a property makes sense to all of you present in the lecture. A thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present here. Now if something feels after a database commit has been made right that is where a transaction cannot do anything. For example if your database crashes after a transaction has successfully been computed and now what some data that basically will go on to how data recovery methods have been created have you created multiple copies of the database or not. So you have to make sure that all of the copies of the database are updated timely in case if a transaction is updating the original copy of the data. So durability has to be again that is not a property of durability. Durability's role is to make sure that once a transaction has been committed those changes are formed. If any other reason leads to the changes or the database being broken that is not your durability. That is basically under the different aspects of a database where we need to have multiple copies if one server completely fails and all of that. Those strategies are something that we will discuss as a part of your HLD module. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Now everyone since all of the asset properties and transaction is a concept is clear to all of you let us actually talk about concurrency and the problems that concurrency can cause. And why each isolation level will be required into the system. So by the end of this section what we will do is we will be able to understand why concurrency creates a problem. What is dirty read what lost update what is non-repeatable read phantom read and identify what problems occurs in each and every one of these scenarios. And to appreciate why isolation level is a concept exists. So in the previous section we have discussed that isolation ensures that the transactions do not interfere with each other. But what exactly can go wrong? What exactly can go wrong when multiple transactions try to execute simultaneously? One example that we have seen where multiple transactions were trying to execute simultaneously was that the account balance became negative. A user was able to withdraw 10,000 sorry 13,000 rupees even though the account balance for the user was just 10,000. And what was the reason for that happening? The reason can be multiple. In our case the reason was incorrect read. In our case the first reason was incorrect read. When the UPI or when the ATM gave the instructions to deduct 8,000 rupees from the account balance or let's say when the UPI ID was or when the UPI transaction was trying to transfer 5,000 rupees to Hersheyth. It was trying to read a balance which our ATM was about to update. The ATM was in the process of updating the account balance. It was in the process of reducing the balance to 8,000 or by 8. But in between the UPI transaction read the account balance. Which should not be present here. Ideally this transaction should get complete and then the UPI transaction should have an access to read the account balance. And as a classical case of an incorrect read where one transaction is in the process of updating the data but at the same time another transaction comes and reads the data. Read the data from an inconsistent state. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? At the same time in this we also had an incorrect update where in the middle of this transaction another transaction came and updated the balance deducted 5,000. Ideally this update should not be happening. Or if I should say while the ATM was performing a transaction to deduct 8,000 from the account balance I should not allow a UPI ID deduct another 5,000 while the transaction was already underway. Then there are some other types of issues that concurrency can cause which is duplicate operations or even invalid reports. For example here the UPI would have reported that the account balance is 10,000 but the account balance was not actually 10,000. The account balance reported by the UPI should have been 2000 rupees because 8,000 was being withdrawn from the ATM. So all of these are the issues that can happen if isolation as a concept is not present in your data. When there is a single transaction that is happening there is not any issue that we generally face but in real world system it is not about executing a single transaction. It is about executing tens of thousands of transactions simultaneously without causing an issue. Now one by one let us try to understand all the issues that concurrency can cause in the system. Where the first one is called as a dirty read. So what is a dirty read? A dirty read occurs when one transaction reads the data written by another transaction that has not yet commented. So here we are drawing money from the ATM was one transaction. At the same time we are drawing money via UPI was another transaction. UPI read the data that was being accessed by the ATM while the transaction was not completely commented as well. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if first of all this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no. Another example for a dirty read can be that I want to transfer 10,000 rupees to Harshit. I put the UPI pin from my side I put the account balance I click enter. Money is debited from my account. I call Harshit and say that hey Harshit I have transferred you 10,000 Harshit checks his balance and says no my account balance is still 2000 I have not received 10,000. And all this Harshit does while the money was being transferred from my accounts to Harshit's account. So what has happened here is that Harshit has initiated another transaction to check the account balance which looked for the data written by another transaction. So I should be updating the balance in the Harshit's account my transaction should have updated the balance in the Harshit's account but that was not completed yet. So partially executed transactions data has been read by another transaction which led to a fight between me and Harshit that manate the base day, mujjatani. Everybody a thumbs up with the meaning of dirty read makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no. Now the problem with the dirty read is that here what has happened is that my account balance has been deducted by 10,000 but that has not reached Harshit. Now I called Harshit I abused Harshit puri me ne gdum, bilkul, gali galos, kardi Harshit say and then the transactions fail. A rollback happened my account balance again got credited by 10,000 I checked my account balance again and now I am sitting like kahn batkarega harshit. That is what a dirty read means. My account balance got deducted by 10,000 I checked my account balance I only have 2000 rupees present in my account initial account balance was 10,000 called Harshit pese bhej dhe Harshit is like nahi ayin. Meanwhile the transaction failed a rollback happened money got credited into my account again I did not check that I kept on abusing Harshit aag bhej dhe kutte pese kha gye a mere evo evo and then after cutting the call I checked the balance and I saw that oh money has again been credited into my account. Everybody present in the session a dirty read if it is created to all of your thumbs up, thumbs down if a dirty read does not make sense to anybody present in the session. A dirty read is where you try to read uncommitted data. Now why is reading an uncommitted data dangerous? Same reasons right incorrect report wrong decisions multiple calculations. Invalid calculations. Now the next issue that can be caused by conker see is called as lost update and this is one of the most important anomalies of concurrency. So a lost update occurs when one transactions update overrides another transactions update. So what do I mean by that? What I mean by that is if let's say again I will talk about two transactions. Okay initial balance in my account is rupees 10,000. Okay transaction one is with draw 2000. Okay so what the transaction one will do is it will read the account balance. It will see that the account balance is 10,000. It will read the balance. The balance is 10,000 which is okay. Did up the balance which is going to make it 8,000. Okay now simultaneously there is a transaction two that is happening. Okay where it is a UPI transfer. Okay where I want to transfer 3000 rupees. Okay this transaction also reads the balance. The balance was 10,000 meaning okay 3000 can be transferred. Did up the balance which will become the updated balance will become 7,000. So it wants to go and update the balance to 7,000. Now because T1 was a little ahead of T2 T1 goes and updates the balance to 8,000. And then T2 was right behind T1 T2 goes and updates the balance to 7,000. Now tell me final balance is 7,000. What should be the actual value of the final balance? 5,000 right. Why did this happen? This happened because one accounts update override the or one transactions update override another transactions update. Ideally what should happen is while one transaction is updating the account balance, this account balance should not be available for other transactions to update or to even view. When this transaction is complete and the updated balance is there only then another transaction should be able to access this balance and calculate the new balance update the value of the balance. Everybody present in the session or thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no. Transaction once update completely disappeared because it was overwritten by the transaction too and this is what is called as a lost update. Okay. Now the next issue that isolation can cause is what is called as a non-repeatable read. So what is a non-repeatable read? A non-repeatable read occurs when the same row is read twice within a transaction and different values are obtained. So the situation where non-repeatable read can cause an issue. So let us simply talk about an e-commerce platform. So what does the checkout flow for an e-commerce platform looks like? I am going to talk about the entire transaction. Okay. The first is to read the user balance. Now this is an e-commerce platform that restricts user to make purchases only from wallet balance. You have to upload the money onto the wallet and then payment will be made from the wallet. So the e-commerce platform reads the user balance. Let us say the user balance comes out to be a hundred dollars. Now user wants to purchase item worth eighty dollars. Okay. Now what happens? Now as a next step, verify that the current balance 100 is greater than equal to the required money which is eighty. Okay. Now here, before the user can purchase the items, there are some checks that we have introduced. Meaning whether that item is serviceable to the particular user or not, what will be the exact delivery date? Okay. And a network ship or before we can proceed, we need to generate a shipping label for that particular item. So there are some operations that we need to execute before the order can be finalized. Okay. So we are running those operations. Meanwhile, what happens is meanwhile and automated subscription fees of fifty dollars gets deducted. So an automated subscription fees of fifty dollars gets deducted from the user account. Now here, we have introduced another check that finally, before placing the order, we will reread the user balance. We will recheck the balance one last time before making the final order. So we reread the balance and in this particular case, the balance comes out to be only fifty dollars. Right. Now this has caused an anomaly within the same transaction. That within the same transaction, the first time when you read the user balance, the user balance was thousand rupees. We did a verification that hundred dollars. We did a verification that hundred is greater than 80 and that is when we generated the shipping label, we reduced the inventory, we did all the changes we wanted to do to the system. On the final verification, we saw that the account balance is just fifty dollars. Should we proceed with the order anymore, everyone? No. Can this be avoided? Can this be avoided, everyone? Yes, this can be avoided. Again, why is this issue being caused? This issue is being caused because the same user balance within one transaction, while one transaction is executing, is being updated by another transaction, which is your automated subscription payment. This could have been simply avoided by making sure that this transaction is isolated in a way that another transaction will not be able to update the user balance while this transaction is being executed. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? What the repeatable read anomaly means? Great. Non-repeatable read anomaly. Now, last is your phantom read anomaly. The phantom row is a little bit more complicated. The two people who just entered the last two people who just entered the last two people. Yes, the person who just sat at the last table, last row. Please stand up. Yes. What are we talking about in today's session? Sorry. You coming in the session now, right? Abhi are you up session? Sorry. Where did he go? Sorry. What call was there? Is there a other one? Where did he go? Where did he go? Sure. Where? First, take the view. What time were you present in the session? What had you come to the session? 11, 30 you entered? 11, 30 you know what had you come to the session? 11, 5, 11, 10, right? And what about you, sir? Why? No, what is this class to sit next to you? Roll number, tell me. 162, roll number? Barney Club. Yes. You will check the number you got in the session. My ex-cctv, my ex-cctv, pjxctv. I am not joking this time. I am going to make sure this checks. No, it is a class. Then it is going to be on Shethan and the admin team to see what they are going to do. Shall I go? Roll number? 162 and 381. The over. Okay. Now coming back to this, what is the Phantom read? A Phantom read occurs when the same quay returns a different set of rows during the same transaction. Okay. Now can I say that for a Phantom read, anomaly to happen again within the transaction, the first requirement is that we should be executing the same query two times. If we are not executing the same query two times to fetch the value, then these read repeatable or non-repeatable read and the Phantom read anomalies are not going to happen. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session, yes or no? Yes. So these are the two anomalies that are caused within the same transaction when the same query is being executed multiple times. Now when or what can be the case of a Phantom read transaction? Can anybody try to give me an example of a Phantom read, anomaly happening within a transaction? Any real life situation where a change caused by another transaction can lead to the data being different when the same query gets executed multiple times. Okay. So if I talk about a very simple real life example of a Phantom read, operation when multiple reads are required, the best examples for that will be ticket booking for a concert or a film movie. Okay. How? Very simply, let's say you try to book a movie ticket on bookmash. Okay. This is something that would have happened with everybody present here. When you try to book a movie ticket on bookmash, the first thing that happens or the first thing that opens up on the bookmash of a portal is a view where all the available seats are shown to you. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? Yes. So the first read show the seat 1234 in the last recliner road to be empty. Now you went to your friends, you discussed that oh, four recliner seats are empty. We will book them. We will see the movie on the recliner. Okay. Okay. All of the four friends agree. You go back to your room, shall we book a ticket? We will book a ticket. We will book a ticket. You click the four seats. You click on proceed. And then what happens is those seats are no longer available. So within the same transactions, two read queries that were supposed to give you the available seats give you different data as an output. That is what is called as a Phantom read anomaly. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Super. So here what you need to understand is the primary difference between Phantom read and repeat read anomaly. In the repeatable non repeatable read anomaly what happens is that the data present in one particular row changes. Okay. For example, when you were trying to fetch the account balance or when you were trying to fetch the user balance, the actual balance for that particular user got updated. But here in a Phantom read what happens is initially when we tried to fetch for the available seats different seats were shown, then when we tried to fetch for an available seats different set of seats were available. What it simply means is that the data, the rows that are being returned for that particular query changes, not the data within the row. Everybody present in the session a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you, thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the session. Say it all of you, that is great. Now today what we have discussed today we have discussed the different anomalies that concurrency can cause. In the last session what we're going to talk about is how we are going to resolve each of these anomalies, how we are going to update each of these anomalies and in the lab we will also try to simulate a real world situation where we will actually try to create all of these anomalies that we have discussed. Okay. Repetable read. Read anomaly, update anomaly, repeatable read anomaly, phantom read anomaly. We will try to simulate all of these anomalies using a concurrent environment. So we're going to try and everyone please look this side. Everyone please look this side. This side please. Okay. So in the next session what we're going to do is we're going to open multiple my equal instances and we're going to execute transactions on each and every one of those instances connecting to the same server. Okay. And we will see the different type of anomalies happening and we will see if different types of isolation logs are introduced onto the system. Then how those isolation logs prevent those anomalies and that is the type of questions that will be asked in SQL as well. Abhiya, I am buddy. Everyone please look this side. You are not from this match. You are not from this match. You are not from this match. You are not from this match. You are not from this match. No, no. I have to make an icon. You have to tell us your number. 436. You have to tell us your number. 1.636. Yes. 2.636. 2.636. 4.636. 4.636. No. I have no idea. 4.636. Everyone please look this side. Fonsavala. Fonsavala. Everyone this side please. Everyone this side please. Everyone decide please. Everyone decide please. Please decide please. Roll number. Roll number. Now come here. Okay. I won't put the address. Roll number. What happened today? What happened today? Who was discusing? You need to do it right now. I am talking to you. I am talking to you because I see sometimes seriously. But this is not possible. There is an option to come and talk to me but this is not acceptable. Okay. Hello. Sorry. Thank you.