We have also discussed different types of joints which is mainly your inner join, left join and right join. Now as we move towards the next part of the correct集. Everyone I have shared a link, please open that database, please create that table and write the queries, like insert the data that is given to you. All you have to do is you have to do three copy paste operations. Arion please complete that I will be back in question. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Everyone can you give me a thumbs up if you have all created the database and the tables. Thank you. Okay. So for today's session the table that I have is I have the employee, I have the feature employee database. So what is happening is that iteration for a company and increase EOS approach, we are doing for the questions on employee. So I am going to be having you get this employee statement where I have the employee name the apartment city, salary, intelligence, experience is indecisive and performance ratings is as well. So performance rating does reject that the performance rating is between one to five. Now everyone as we talk about SQL right in today's session we are going to be talking about aggregate queries and now what is an aggregate query. Aggregate queries are what we use to transform raw data into some meaningful insights, some aggregate insights for the data that is given to you. So if you talk about the definition aggregate functions operates on multiple roles and produce a single output value representing the aggregate of all the roles that you are taking. So we have the aggregate function, the maximum of the minimum of the minimum of the maximum, the sum of all the salaries and that is what our basic aggregate functions are. Can everybody give me a yes and this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Now there are some core aggregate functions. We have more functions but you can explore those functions as well. Here we will talk about the core aggregate functions and how to use them properly. So the first core aggregate function is the count function. So let's get started from the table. The first question that I have to inform is how many employees are present in our company. How many employees are present in our company? How many employees are working in scale? Now one way for me to do that is I do select employee ID from employees and I will see how many unique employees are present. I will say 100 employees are present. But is the quality that you get is intended to give me the count of employees? It is not intended to give me the count of employees. It is intended to give me the list of all the employees ID's and that is not what my purpose was. Whenever there is a requirement of computing the count of any particular attribute. The number of occurrences or the number of reports present in the table for any particular attribute. We will be using the count aggregate function. So here what I want is I want to count the number of employees. I will select count start from and what I will get is 100. Now what will be start of present? Start in the value that we use when we want to count all the, no matter what the value present in those roles are. Anybody who comes up with this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes or no everyone? Super. Now let me show you something else. So in the last database that we use right we have this courses table in which we have the course ID, course name, department ID, instructor ID and credits. Now in this particular case what I have is I have 10 different courses. Let us say if I will write a query select count start from courses. What I will get is I will get 10 right which means count start which means the count of all the rules. How many rules are present in your table? But if I want to count how many instructors are present in my table? What do you think will be the output of this? Will we get 10 or will we get 8? What we get is 8 because two of the entries here are null. So remember if you are going to apply the count on any one particular attribute you are going to get what you are going to get the total number of non null values present for that particular attribute. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Now moving on to the next question right now. Anjuman knows that we have 100 employees in this scalar right now. Taylor on its employees in the form of value. What should we do in this case everyone? What should we are logic to solve this question? So can I say in this case all I want to be doing is I just want to find the sum of the salary of all of the employees that are working in scalar can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes what is the aggregate function for that the aggregate function for that is some so what I will do is select some of salary from employees and what I see is in a month scalar spend 90,000 on its employees in the form of salaries. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Yes that's great now the next question Anjuman asked is hey can you tell me what is the highest salary that I have paid to any employee in my company. Which aggregate function if I need to be using here max aggregate function I'm going to be using. Right. And the max salary offered to any employee here is the lack everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes now the next question the Anjuman asked me is hey what is the minimum salary that I paid to any employee. Which function are you going to be using in this case min function and that is 54,000 for one. Now the next question Anjuman asked me give you the opportunity to tell me what is the average salary that I paid to any employee. Right and which function are we going to be using for this average function what is the average function in sequel AVG. And these are your core aggregate function so the average salary paid to any employee is like a fee of that. Everybody is thumbs up if this is crystal clear to all of you come down and say anything that is not clear about these core aggregate function that we haven't seen good. Very good but then again I am not a rattu to sorry I will just not give out just the information that is out for all of you. And my advice is just properly. So I say that an anjuman this average looks a little bit to me and the reason we can see that the maximum salary you paid with employee is 30,000 minimum salary that you paid with this toy is 54,000. Avril is coming out to be 90,000 it doesn't make sense. Why it doesn't make sense is because if you see what I have is. I have total seven different departments in which they have toys and divided. And I know for a fact that engineering people and management people may much more than what people will support on me. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if you would agree with me on that. So looking at the overall company average doesn't make sense right. What I need to do is I need to look at the department wise average. Great good idea give me the average salary of each department. How will I solve this question. If there is no clause to do this what would be my approach to solve this question. Sorry W three. So if I go by a brute force way to solve this question. What I would do is can I say I would go like this select average of salary from employees where. The department is equal to engineering. And I will be like I'm human engineering average salary is 1,6,512. Now please wait on human. HR average salary is 68,545. Now please wait on human. Sales average salary is so and so. Now please wait. So it is the right way of answering the approach. Now yes well this is still do it because all I have is only has 7 categories. 7 for the department is the people and distributed imagine this number being in thousands, 10,000 millions or even lakhs right. In that case everyone can I say if I don't have a proper logic in case missing one of them will become very. I will be proved to miss at least one of them while calculating the averages manually correct. Secondly manually computing the average of even 10,000 departments or 10,000 different groups is not going to be possible right. So what approach do we use for this? This is a classical case of the group by clause. So the next topic that we're going to get started with is the group by clause and this is one of the most important topics from today's session. Okay. This is where people get confused. This is where things become a little difficult and they are not ready. So the problem statement that we are trying to solve is very clear to us because we want the average quality of each and the individual to be possible. How am I going to solve this what will be the solution will be using the group by clause. Now what is the group by clause? The group by clause what it does is it creates groups internally. So in the data that we are looking at what it will do is create groups internally and then it will compute the required data for the groups that we have created. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all the few present in the session? Yes. Now for every group by clause we need to define on the basis of which attribute do you need to create the groups? So in the question asked by Anshman what is the attribute on the basis of which I need to create groups or buckets of employees department. So let us try to write the query here. Select department and the average salary from employees group by department. And what I get is I have department and the average salary of the employee working in this department. If you want you can validate whether the data is correct or not. 1.612, 68545, 68545, 75750, 75750, 75750. Everybody first of all thumbs up if how the group by clause makes sense to all of the present in the session. What it does is it creates internal groups where it will group all the employees belonging to the same department together. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Yes, that is great. So now I will ask you to write a simple question, simple query using your first group by operation. And the question number one that I want you to solve is write a query to get the employees and their salaries group by department. So what I want you to be able to do is I want to be able to write a query to get all the employees and that salary, but they should be grouped on the basis of the department. Can you please try to write this query? Take two minutes and try to write this equal query. So let's look at what do we need. What we need is employee their salaries grouped by the department. So what do I need? I need select employee name department and salary from employees grouped by department. So how many of you have written this equal query? Can you please raise your hands? Did this work for anyone? It will not even work for me. Why did this equal query not work? Why was the group by operation not able to group all the elements or all the employees belonging to an individual group together? It is because of how the group by function works. So how the group by function works is. First of all, the group by function splits the data into buckets. And everyone, if we are using a group by, we need to understand that every selected non aggregate column must appear in the group by. So group by clause does not just sort the added order of the data because they have to use that group by class. So solve the question that is given to you. You will not be using a group by clause, but instead what you will be doing is you will be using an order by clause. And this will give you all the employees ordered by their departments together. This will group all the employees based on their departments together. Group by once you create these groups. You need to understand, will return only one aggregate value for each group that you have created each bucket that you have created. The bucket is now one, record in the output that we will look at. All the record belonging to that bucket will be grouped together into one output. Can everybody be a come-down with this basis to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. Which means, first of all what we will do is. We will decide which attribute we want to group the database on to or group the table one. So here I want to create the grouping on the basis of the departments. Now apart from this attribute, which is a part of your group by any other attribute that you use in the query needs to be an aggregate attribute. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Please give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Every selected non aggregate column must appear in the group by it. So if a column is non aggregate, it needs to be the column on the basis of which you are creating the groups. Everybody present in the session a thumbs up a thumbs down if there's anything that is not making sense not happy with the way we are responding in the chat. All the hundred people a thumbs up if this is clear thumbs down if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody about the group by clause. I'll be happy to explain again. I'll be happy to answer again. For example, everyone along with the salary if I also want to find out the count of employees in each department, right? What I'm just going to do is this. Thank you. Okay, so here you can see the one minute, I have to pick up everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session or thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. That's right. Now aggregate functions can be anything if you want the highest salary for each department you can do that the average salary in the count, right? Any of the aggregate functions that you've discussed can be used here, right? Super. But now I'm going to make things a little bit difficult for you. Now the next question that I want you to be able to solve is for employees having more than three years of experience. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if the question is crystal clear to all of you? The question is right is equal query to return the average salary of each department for employees having more than three years of experience. Can you please take a moment and try to write the query for this? So let's say let's try to solve a different question. No question. I'll give you two questions. Let's make this the question number three. Question number two will be to write a sequel query to return the average salary of each department with an average salary more than 70,000. So first I turn the sequel query to return the average salary of each department with an average salary more than 70,000. So you only need a list of those departments whose average salary is more than 70,000. If you're able to write this question, then try the next question which is to write a sequel query of the average salary of each department for employees having more than three years of experience. Take five minutes try to write a sequel query. Try to search for what would be the correct answer if you encounter a sequel. Please don't do try to repeat for the queries for the question. Then again the answer I have is trying to start with a sequel to write a sequel to what issue is there in the lower page? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So let's try to solve the first question. So let's try to write a sequel query to return the average salary of each department with an average salary more than 70,000. So this query will give me the average salary of all of the departments. Now I only want the departments having a salary greater than 70,000. So what will I do? Where average salary is greater than 70,000. And what? Well, we will use the way of the class. Why is the way of the class not working? The reason for the way of the class not working is because the way of the class is applicable to the original data and the standard in the table. If you want to filter those groups on the basis of any condition, the correct syntax for that is having. Why is it like that? Why could they not use where itself? I don't have the answer to that. You don't have to look for the answer to that. You just have to remember that if filtering needs to be done on the original data, that we are going to use to create the groups. We are going to use the where it was. Whereas filtering needs to be done for the groups that we have created using the group by class. We are going to be using the hard work for filtering or conditions. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Clear to everyone? Very good. Now, having condition also supports all the type of conditions that we have written between 70,000 and 120,000. All the type of conditions that we can put in the where it was or the where we put the same conditions we can put in the having keyword as well. The only difference is having is used for groups where is used for the raw data. Now, coming back to the next query which is write a SQL query to return the average salary for each department of employees having more than three years of experience. So, what is the logic that I want to execute here? So, what I have here is I have my employees table. I want to create groups from this employees table on the basis of the departments. If I use a group by first, the data that I will see will be the data of the groups. Now, once the groups are created, can you walk on the individual data of the employees? No. So, what you need to do is first, you need to filter this on the basis of the where clause. Okay? And now, once the filtering is done, what you will have is you will have employees with experience greater than three years. Then what you will do is then you will perform a group by and compute the average salary of those employees. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. So, here what you need to do is you need to understand the where condition decides which data will go for creating the groups, creating the pockets. And the higher clause decides which buckets do you want to display at the end or return as the output. So, here the query that we are going to be writing is select, department, average of salary from employees where? Experience years is greater than three group by department. And here now you can see what you have is for people with experience greater than three years you have the average of each department. Which means here in the support there are no employees having an experience greater than three years. So, here we can check that as well here select star from employees where department is equal to support and experience years greater than three and you get an empty set. Let us write that particular group is a deal with present. No record from that group even right or group in the way at all completely greater TF noise from the support department. Everybody comes up with this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Okay. So, as a topic I hope now everybody is crystal clear with the difference between where versus having. So, what does where does what does where do where filter the rules and where filter the rules before the grouping. Whereas, you are having filter the groups and it filters the group after the grouping happens. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session it comes down that there is anything here that does not make sense to anybody. Now, Antumas calling me again now you should go ahead. So, next question is now, Antumas page is calling on Instagram yesterday. And the first three he saw was our honorable prime minister requesting everyone to implement work from home. Right. But again, it is never really a country because not all of it I have a word with the crisis for the few short term. And still we have managed to keep the prices the same but that will not be a reality for long if the consumption isn't cut down. Okay. So, Antumas me I should we do this as well I am like why not? Why not? Therefore, it is a beautiful place Bangalore is not Bangalore is also a beautiful place but it is a big city. Therefore, it is not a big city it is a beautiful tier to city. Sundar lakes, Sundar park. I want to go back. So, Antumas is like no, no. First of all give me an idea of city wise what is the employee come. So, what I do is, now I am here to study a group by a group by a group. So, I will tell you everything. Select city, count start from employees group by city. This is the city. Can everybody give me a example of this? I do very easy piece of cake for now. But now, Antumas are very very. Give me city wise department wise count of people. So, in Bangalore how many people from engineering, finance, marketing, HR management and sales are there? And city wise department wise the count of people count of employees. So, what is it that we need to do here? Can I say what I just need to do is I need to be able to form the groups now. Not just on the basis of the city, but on the basis of the city and the department can everybody give me a yes. If this makes sense to all of you present in this session, what will I do? Add department here. Add department here and you solve this. Can everybody give me a example of the quality that I have written this crystal here to all of you present in this session? I included the department in the group by clause. Now, the groups that are created are not just created on the basis of the city, but created where the city and the department is same for the employee. People thumbs up if this is clear to all of you thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Atharva, can you please help me with which particular query you need help with again? I will explain that again. Sorry, I missed your message in the chat. Where? Atharva. Which query? Sorry. Now, as I will get data, is this how I am going to show the data to anyone? Bangalore engineering 10, Delhi HR 4, Mumbai engineering 9, Phune sales 4, will be like, will be like, will be like, will be like, will be engineering or will be like, will be instructor 0. But not as a part of the company. So, what I need to do is I need to make sure this data looks a little bit presentable. What I am going to do is once the group are created, I am going to sort the data on the basis of city because I am sure I wanted the data on the basis of the city. Now, this does not look very good. Sorry. How can you question CEO's question? I am not sure. I am not sure. Why do I know this? I am going to get data, I am going to get data. So, maybe what he wants is he wants to see the feasibility of sales. If on ground sales are required, how many city presence do we have? So, in that way. But again, here I have a query, data legal. Now, here what you have is you have a city by the break up of each department. If I want a department by the break up of each city, what changes blinded here? Should I change the order in which I have performed the group by here? Here I am doing group by by city and then by department. Should I do a group by by department and then city? Everybody, a thumbs up or a hands up if you feel that will change the output of the query? But now, the question is here what I have is city wise department data I have. Now, I want department wise city data. That for engineering department, how many people are from Indore? How many people are from Delhi? How many people are from Bangalore? So, should I change the order of the attributes in the group by clause? Will that change anything? Anything changed? It changed right. The order of the department is now up and down. For Bangalore, I have marketing first engineering later. Did it change the overall way I wanted to preview the data? No, he right. It did not. Why it did not? Is because when you are creating the groups right? It does not matter the order of the group. There is an and condition in this to group the data into these groups. Only difference is now in the and condition it is taking the department first and the city after that. That is why you can see the relative ordering of department will be different. But overall, the order in which the data will be displayed will always depend on the order by clause. Group by will only decide what do you want to group the data on the basis. Now, if you want to change the perception of this data what you will actually need to do is, you will actually first of all need to change the order in which the data is being printed. So, instead of city, department, I am going to print department, comma, city. And instead of ordering the data on the basis of the city, what I am going to do is, I am going to order the data on the basis of the department. Still again, the data does not look very clean to me. So, what I will do is, after I sort the data on the basis of the department, I will also sort the data on the basis of the count. That too in the descending order. And this data looks good to me. That for engineering, Adorama, I am the most number of people who is even, Bandlobe has 10,000 by a 9,000. So, they have 4,000. Again, what can be the decision for this? The decision for looking at this data might be that, oh, we are moving from work from office to a work from home model. Even if we have to open some satellite offices to, for employees to come and meet each other maybe once a week, which cities should be focused on majorly you can do and see that. Everybody present in the session can all of you give me a thumbs up if, how multiple attributes can be used to perform the group by make sense to all of you present in the session. A thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present here. Yes or no everyone? Yes. Now, what I am going to be doing is, in the document that I have shared with you, I will add a couple of questions at the end of the document. I want all of you to take the next 10, 15 minutes to solve those questions in the meanwhile, I will take the attendance. Let me pose the questions one by one. Okay. So, I have added six questions to the same document. Please take a couple of minutes and try to solve these six questions. Now, meanwhile, I will take the attendance. Now, for the attendance, there are some details that I would like to share with all of you. I want each and every one of you to listen to me very, very carefully when I talk about the attendance right now. First of all, now we have completely migrated to our 25-year-old student, who is currently at the school, we are all here in this to be updated right. The unity of the attendance is, we are taking it. Whenever I will be uploading the attendance, because it's an AI crock reading, there is a possibility that some students may not be back for as a committee. The moment that the attendance is a very, very important thing to track and to feel that that's really needed. If you start with a mind-thritching, if you start with a mind-thritching, then you have to be able to see that every person is lost, and if you are able to see the number of different students as a student, this is the next one that people don't have to be able to see. This is the next one that people don't have to be able to see. If you can see, you can see that. If you can see, there is a small group, you need to start to have a minute. Okay, the last one. Anyone please look this way. People at the end are keeping looking at the camera. The last two people are keeping looking at the camera. The last two people are keeping looking at the camera. Thank you. Thank you. That's it. Any other questions? Any other questions? Any other questions? Any other questions? Any other questions? Any other questions? Last group. Any other questions? Any other questions? group A right? So for this right the previous classes have not been synced on this dashboard yet we'll be doing that by the end of this week. At the end of this week if there's any class for which you were present then there are tremendous classes. I'll update it. So you would have given the present when I was manually taking your tickets right? So I would have that in my record. I already have that that is what is the data that they would be syncing on the platform right? So Cool everyone your attendance has been marked you have 15 minutes to raise a nudge in case you haven't been marked present please check the SSD dashboard and see if for the aggregate query session you haven't been marked present create a nudge and then go back to start solving the queries. I'll call you name at the end of the session and I'll mark you present if you are there in the session. Everyone there is no point of this much of discussion that is happening each and every one of you please individually try to solve the query and I will give it to you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. So let's start solving each question one by one. Okay. Everyone please look at the screens now. Let's start solving the questions one by one. The moment we are done with the queries we can end the session that would be it from my end in today's session. So if you want to get free early please be quiet for some time. Let's complete the queries quickly. Right. Now the first query is which department has the highest salary. How will I answer this question? How will I answer this question? So there are multiple ways to solve this question. If your goal is to be able to answer the department that has the maximum salary what you can do is you can select department, max of salary from employees group by department order by max salary limit one. Order by max salary in the descending order limit one. Which has the maximum average salary sorry sorry sorry sorry. Okay again not very difficult what I will do is instead of max salary I will just do average salary here. And which department has the maximum average salary? Manage. You also have what is the maximum average salary for that everybody can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. That is a possibility. In that case again I will share one more way to write this query. So what he is saying is what if there are more than one department having the same maximum average salary in that case how are you going to solve that. Let us try to write that. In that case what we actually do is we have to write sub queries. In that case what we need to do is we need to write a query within a query. First of all what I need is I need to group all of the departments on the all of the employees on the basis of the department and compute the average salary. Now out of those average salaries what I need is I need the maximum average salary correct for that what I am going to do is I am going to write a query within that. Now with the result of that sub query I am going to be using a having clause at the end which will say that give me only those departments where the average salary of the department is equal to this max average salary that have gotten from a sub quit. So how to write that is something that we will talk about in the next session how sub queries in nested queries works but that is one probable solution for that question right whenever we need a data that is not a part of our groups we need a maximum of all of that aggregate on aggregators required we are going to be using sub queries for that. Makes sense? Super. Now the next question is find the departments where the employee count is more than five. And the average salary lies between 90,000 and 1,000 and 20,000. So select department from employees group by department. Having down star greater than five and average of salary between 90,000 and 120,000. Can everybody give me a thumbs up in the second question also makes sense second query also makes sense to all of you. Hello. Hello. Now tell me this en place and there it says sellers. . I mean that,aneously ng's equation's length becomes 3 every cosine of equal Okay. Coming to the question number 3, question number 3 is asking you to find the departments having more than 10 employees again I am here like this it is very simple. Find the departments from employees group by departments having count greater than 10 and these are the departments having account greater than 10. Can everybody give me a yes of this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Anybody any issues anything that is not clear anything that you would like me to explain again? Great. Question number 4 is to find the cities where the total salary expenditure is greater than 1, 5 lakhs. Okay. So now in this case what I want is I want to select city from or if you can if you want you can also do some of salary as total salary expenditure from employees group by city having some of salary greater than how much 5,000 and see everyone. Now here what I have done is instead of writing some of salary as the name of the attribute being displayed I have used the AAS business total salary expenditure and now what you have is you have the list of the departments where the total salary expenditure sorry list of the cities where the total salary expenditure is more than 5 lakhs per month. Everybody thumbs up if the query makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Please please free to give me a thumbs down with this question does not make sense to anybody? Yes that is great. Moving to the second last question which is find the departments where the difference between the highest salary in the lowest salary is greater than 5,000. So what will I do? The department from employees group by department having max of salary minus min of salary greater than 50,000 again not required but it is a good practice if you are computing anything just wrap it in brackets. So max of salary minus min of salary is greater than 50,000 let's see what we get we get management is the only department where the difference in the maximum and the minimum salary is greater than 50,000. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this query is crystal clear to all of you presenting the session? Yes which brings me to the last question for the day which is find the cities having more than 5 engineering employees. Now here everyone there are two ways to solve this question. Can I say here city files what I mean is I only need the data for engineering employees can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. So select city from employees. Now for grouping I am going to send only the data of the employees which belongs to the engineering department where department is equal to engineering then I will do group by city having count star greater than 5 and this query will give you the list of those cities where the count of engineering employees is more than 5. Can everybody give me a thumbs up is the first way to write the query makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now the second way to write the queries if you don't want to filter the data that you are sending if you want to create all the groups you will need to create the groups on the basis of the department and the city right. So select city from employees group by department comma city having department equals to engineering and count star greater than 5 and you will get the same result. So both queries will give you the same answer it just that it is dependent on how you want to approach it whether you want to filter only the engineering data and then share that or whether you want to filter all the data and then eventually just apply conditions by doing a group by on multiple columns. Can everybody give me a yes if?