you you you you Okay I Yes you guys enjoy that course doing the case study and all trying to figure out to make like take the first step to a data driven decisions right. Now, how many of your outsets that you are going to have this term the core courses? Data analytics classes have they started yet? So, this term what you are going to do is you are going to go deeper into performing these analysis, these statistics which we may just touched in the last term. In the last term what we did was we just introduced you to one or two types of tests that can be performed on your data sets to either prove or invalidate your hypothesis meaning either select or reject your hypothesis right. Now, in course one, any given problem statement where we had to work on the hypothesis calculate the Z value, P value, alpha whatever you want to simulate our own data set by doing let us say 1000 or 1000 dice rolls right or in case of the case studies what we were provided with documents sorry a CSV file containing of the data. You want to get all the data from your systems you know back and will the data be a CSV file? No can anyone tell me? Not and what is the issue with data being present in those CSV files? Data cannot be? Why not? So, distribution, the issue which multi on the CSV file at the same time then multiple of the file will be created and because of which eventually data consistency will also become a problem. Imagine 100 people working or 100 threads working on the same data each creating a copy of its own file and eventually merging all of these copies together right. Here we are not able to properly merge the code written by two people without creating a conflict. Imagine 100 people working on the same data set right. So, that is a good reason. Anybody else? Yes security becomes a very big issue. Access cannot be handled very e on file it is a very complicated process. Anybody else? Any other reason why you would not want to work on a CSV file to store data of a company like you, storing every single right every single detail about every single right details of the driver's user. Absolutely correct the size of the data. So, imagine storing millions of entries in a CSV file and being able to even locate any single entry without linearly iterating over all of those entries together. So, managing such a huge data in a CSV file or in any file based format becomes very very difficult. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? Yes. So, can I say that for real time applications that we build, we need to think of a smart way of storing our data. Can everybody give a thumbs up first of all you would agree with me on this? Yes. And that is what this course is going to be all about. In today's session, we are going to do a little bit of discussion around why. So, we have started with that which is why there is a requirement of a central database, where there is a requirement of a structured way of storing the data for applications. So, what are the biggest reasons that we want? The first biggest reason that we want is a structured organization of the data. Second, concurrency, multiple people need to have an access to the same data. So, we need to have roles in place so that multiple people working on the same data do not break the data. Third, consistency. If multiple people are working on the same data, the data needs to remain consistent across all of the systems. Fourth biggest reason is availability. So, availability is also a very big factor. Data cannot become unavailable at any point of time, which means if one copy of the data crashes, we need to have a backup copy of the data set present. Recovery needs to be a process that needs to be in place. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if you would agree with me on this? Imagine you are working in Instagram and you go and you do RM minus RF users. This is something that anybody, any hated against Instagram can go and do that right. So, there needs to be backup in place in case someone does that right. Now, because these we have is we have data be just a second. So, thinking of data, can we talk from data to data top? Is that the engineer laptop? Is it a engineer? Correct. There is a company in the window. Who is responsible for finally executing the instructions that are once away or process or to the instructions. So, computer on small, unlessed unit of memory that is present computer is registered. So, we need to be in place. So, it is the speed of the speed of the computer. So, a one key guards see. In which where is the RAM? Where does RAM sits? So, and if RReal RAM with 2013 gaming multiplayer model is all there We make sure to store these instructions and share it with the CPU. What is the process behind that how many layers are involved in this entire process? That is something that you will cover as a part of your operating system. This is responsible for all of this. Last thought? 4. I also have this specific memory entry,ее because this looks like a presentation as the chromatic data the journey from. transfer options to them is not a computer issues are directly done. Again investorsjm helps us translate andten엽 says it doesn't really exist to define what for opportunities where this is not really defined as the moderator that must be used to understand between Then the plan omissions based on the logic that we are not even aware about yet. Maybe after the OS course we might get a little bit above that but right now we are keeping you 궁금. So, what is the need that we have? the need that we have the data that is present is the state of the state of the state of And the first one is example, I will master that in the context of the marriage. So, the future link of the other various management plays, will go into the APS for all of us. So, in case you believe that there would be a common plan of those seats that will be present in most systems, talk about why that is the case. Now, for a SQL based data, the most common one of them is my SQL, which is what we will be discussing as a scope of this course. Another very common is post-GRE SQL, Oracle SQL Server and many more. What we would be focusing on mainly is my SQL with comparison with Postgres SQL as well to understand why some people or some applications are a lot of people now prefer using Postgres SQL. First of all, what you have to understand is that at the core of both of these database management systems are implementing a SQL database. It is just that both of them differs a little bit in terms of the features that this supports, the type of data that this support, a little bit of optimization that they have done over those SQL systems, SQL databases. So, we are going to do a little bit of comparison between both of them as we move ahead in this course as well. Regarding no SQL databases, now to be able to understand what are no SQL databases, in today's session, if I was going to go into the details of what are SQL databases, what or how does a SQL database stores the data. No SQL databases will be covered as a part of your HLD module, as a part of your HLD course. Some examples for no SQL databases are Cassandra, GraphQL. As I said, SQL databases are purely SQL databases. Anything that deviates from that, because if you look at Cassandra, you would not talk about the SQL part of Cassandra. That is something that you are already aware of. Generally, it is not considered in SQL databases. Other cutting, as I said, we are talking on a very higher level. So, anything that is not a part of a SQL database, right now we are just going to consider it as a no SQL database. So, eventually all of those types of databases like MongoDB and all that are going to be covered as a part of your no SQL database lectures, which will be happening in your HLD module. Because for these databases, you need to understand the high level architecture of these databases, how do they work? In this course, as I said, we will majorly just be talking about SQL databases. Yes, a SQL databases are relational databases. Now, before we start with this course, let us first talk about what will be the structure of this course, how many sessions we are going to have? And all of that, so that we do not have any confusion before we start. I think most of you have already gone through the curriculum that was shared with you. Yes, so today we have the intro to DBMS relational model and SQL query session. Now, here if you see, this time we are doing it a little differently. Lab sessions are not going to happen after your lectures. Lab sessions are your regular lectures. Okay, attendance is mandatory. It is like a regular lecture only. It is just named as lab because in this session, what we are going to do is we are going to bring problems statements into the session and we are going to practice those questions here. Discuss the solutions of those questions here. So in today's session, what we are going to do is we are going to talk about databases relational databases, which is your SQL databases. And we are going to get started with basic query writing. What is query? All of that I will talk about that in a moment. Next session would be a lab session where we would majorly be covering examples on these queries. So whatever queries we are able to complete today, good enough otherwise the remaining queries and the examples we will be doing in the lab session. Then we are going to talk about joints, which is again a type of query. Practice joints. Then two lectures on aggregate queries, sub queries and nested queries. So aggregate queries are those queries where you are going to compute or use aggregate functions like average of the data, min of the data, maps of the data. Right. And sub queries and nested queries talks about query within a query like nested loops. Then again, we are going to practice that. Now, when we talk about any database, the goal is not just being able to query that database, the goal is not just being able to update that database. The goal is not just being able to create a given database. When you are creating an application, right, the biggest challenge is to be able to design that database. To be able to understand how the data is going to be present in the database, what parameters do I need to store? How am I going to organize that data? What is going to be the diagram of my data set? And that is what is on an overview called as schema design. Schema design does not talk about the actual data. It talks about how the data is going to be stored in this database management system. So in these four sessions in schema design, what we're going to do is we are going to talk about. Will take real business case will take a real problem statement, for example, a hospital management system or an airline booking system or a social media application like Instagram or a lot of other examples we're going to take. So in these three sessions schema design one, two and three, I'll be taking one example each in each session. We will be having a discussion in the session. We will be talking about the requirements, how to distribute the data across multiple tables, all of that we're going to cover as a part of these three codes. Eventually we're going to come up with an e or diagram, which is called as an entity relation diagram. I'll explain what that is in the day session and then we're going to have a lap session where I'll give two problem statements to us of lap session one or per problem statement. You'll get 40, 45 minutes to think work on the problem statement and then for the next 15 minutes, I'll be discussing the solution. We will only for two problem statements and then we will be done here. Now, once these schema design sessions are over, you're going to get a take home assignment on schema design where you will be randomly distributed across groups of 10 and you will have to do that project in groups of 10. But you will not be evaluated on the basis of your submission. Submissions are mandatory. Obviously, if there's a poor quality submission, you will be disqualified or marks will be directed. But your final marks are not going to be on the basis of the submission. The final marks are going to be on the basis of a waiver, which not everyone in the group will give. There will be one person selected a random from the group whose waiver will be conducted and the group will be awarded the same marks every body present in the group. But whatever, whatever, whatever. This is how it has been going on so far in all of the iterations of the SQL module. So, it's a group project, which means everybody present in the group has to contribute to that project. Now, now, now, now, now. In the group, the group will be homogeneously distributed according to your grades, which means there will be people with good grades, people with bad grades, people with average grades. The goal of the group is to make sure everybody present in the group knows why a certain decision has been made, why the database is created like this, basically have an entire idea about the schema design. But again, I know this might feel like a little unfair, so there's a lifeline present as well. Which means if anybody in the group is not contributing towards the discussions, towards the project, towards at least understanding how the schema has been designed, being prepared for the waiver, the people in the group can vote out one person from the group. So, that decision will be taken before your waiver, you can just comment, let us know that this is a person that we voted out. But to vote out any individual, you need to have at least 50% majority, which means at least five people need to vote in favor of removing one person from the group. That person will be eliminated from the process and will get a zero in that waiver. Super, Big Boss Season 11, take it. Now, at the end of the lab is where you're going to know what your groups are, what the project for each group is. And you would have four, three to four days or five days to work on the schema design. It's going to be a very simple problem statement, it's not a rocket science, you will just have to design a database, that's it. The last four sessions are about the optimization and security of the database management system. So, transactions talks about how queries can be wrapped up as transactions. We'll talk about that a little bit later on in the course, right now we don't have that context, but the overall idea is wrapping it up or defining it as a transaction, make sure that in case if a query fails, we have complete control over that. And asset is basically the properties that any particular database should follow is at Omensity, Consistency, Identity, right. Indexing fundamentals will majorly cover how searching in databases, specifically your SQL databases can be optimized. How the search time complexity can be reduced for your frequently asked queries on the database. And the last one is isolation level that talks about the most important feature which is to keep your database consistent, right. So, my next question to all of you present in the session would be when I talk about today's systems, today's modern systems, right. Earlier, we just have one CPU core, right. Right now what I have is I have multiple cores present in the CPU. Can everybody give me a thumbs up first of all, is this makes sense to all of you present in the session. All of you have seen this right to core three core four core. Right now we also have something which is called as hyper threading, which can make a four core CPU into an eight core CPU. Right. So, the reason for talking about this is to understand that now that the CPU is a combination of multiple cores put together, right. Now it is not just capable of running one instruction at a time, it is capable of running multiple instructions in parallel. Okay. For example, even let's say if I take a very basic example what we have is we have two cores in our CPU. And what my goal is that I am given an array and I have to sort this array using merge sort algorithm has more sort been covered in in the last course. Yes. Now how does more sort algorithm works. All of you are aware of it. We divide the array into two hops. We sort the first off. Then we sort the second off and then we merge them together. Can everybody give me a thumbs up with this makes sense to. Yes. Now all of the programs that we've written so far I'm not sure front end courses whether we have written any asynchronous programs yet in the front end. Or not if you've written that's great, but at least in the scope of DSA problems starts any other course whatever programs that we've written there sequential programs which means they execute one line after the other one command after the other. Which means in that what is going to happen is you're going to sort the first half here. Come back. You're going to sort the second off here. Come back and then you're going to merge the array here. But when I sort the first half versus when I sort the second half. Do they have even a single array element in common. Yes or no. So tell me what is stopping me to sort the first half here. Sort the second half here. Which means the first and the second half can be sorted in parallel to each other. Okay. Reducing my time exactly by half. And then whenever they are sorted I can just use one of the course to merge these two together and that is what is called as parallel programming. Everybody present in the session can you give me a yes or this makes sense to all of you. Now this is happening within just one system. Why is parallel programming required? Why is parallel programming a need of the hour? The reason being when we talk about servers when we talk about applications on a scalable level. There are millions and billions of people trying to access the same data at any point of time. For example, a very simple case will be your streaming of the IPL that's happening as of now. Today we see that 20 30 growth people are signing up to watch an IPL match. Now I know we have lots and lots of servers but there's a limitation to that. We need to do as much optimization as we can and this is one of those optimization which is introduction of parallel programming. But there's a call of introducing parallel programming as well which means what is the call multiple threads. In the same system might try to access the same database at the same time. Can I say that is possible right? One thread, one process is trying to update an entry at the same time the other process is trying to read that entry. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if you agree that in a very complex architecture system this is very highly likely possible. Yes and here what we need to do is we need to introduce some protocols to make sure that because of this our data does not break. We need to introduce different isolation levels while creating the tables while creating the queries while creating the database to make sure that concurrency does not impacts consistency. Everybody present in the session first of all a thumbs up if the needs of the isolation level makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, that's great. Multiple thread trying to access the same data. Now if we freely allow them to do that can I say imagine you're trying to read an entry at the same time someone is trying to update that entry. You read the same thing and then I'll update it and read the same mistake. I just just read the data. Basically whenever someone is updating an entry we should not be able to read the entry. These are some protocols that needs to be defined until unless these are defined everybody's fee to do free will. You can get some sort of a mark until unless it is not punishable by law. So you have to define those laws that is what is the meaning of isolation levels isolation. Carve it during the execution of a particular query. How isolated we want to keep that data again. There are multiple types of isolation level lock which means you can put a lock just on the entry that you are updating that if I'm updating one particular entry this entry is not accessible to anybody. Second is I can put a lock on the entire data set that when I'm working on even one entry of the data set nobody is allowed to touch that data set. So depending on what is the requirement different types of isolation levels are defined. And that is what we will be talking about in this session. Then in the next session we will be implementing and understanding the impact of those isolation levels. Meaning we will simulate we will open multiple sequence servers in our system. We will introduce different types of isolation levels. And for each of those isolation levels we will try to see what happens when we try to perform certain commands. Now this is very important. Why is this very important because this session is where you will get a true understanding of what happens on each isolation levels. And why is it important to do that because in the examinations you will not have an option to simulate and check what will be the output. You will get questions that if so and so isolation level is applied and this is the scenario what will happen. You will have to select an answer. You will not get to simulate that. So this is where you have to make sure all of your doubts are clear. And after this practice enough so that you have an understanding of the system and you don't need a simulation to be able to make a judgment on what is going to happen. Everybody first of all thumbs up if the structure of the course is crystal clear to all of you present in the session. The thumbs down is this anything here that does not make sense to anybody present. Mostly all of the queries will be covered by midterm. So before schema design. All sorts of queries. So in the midterm you should be knowing how to write a SQL query given a database or even create your database of your own given the requirements. You would not be expected to design a database that is something that will come after the midterm but given a database or given what you need to create you need to be able to create it and query updated deleted whatever queries are given to you. Super. Now even before we get started there are some requirements that we have as a part of this course. So if we will all check your notice boards on the meetings right. What I've shared with you is first of all what you need to do is you need to install my SQL in your systems. So on the link that I've shared with you again if you want you can install newer version as well but any a dot version would work. So step number I'm not right now you don't have to do it right now you to make sure to get it done before the next session. Okay install my SQL on your systems. Secondly make sure it works correctly on the terminal or on the CLI. Now install first you will have to use the installer to do that and make sure you correctly add the path to the SQL file to your whichever file in your system contains the path to all of the executables. Bash or Z shell or any other files like in your window system right. Third when we are going to be running the SQL queries. It is your wish if you want to do that on the command line it is very likely possible on the command line you can easily do that or what you can do is command line basically your terminal or what you can do is you can also use a SQL client to connect to the database and be able to execute the queries properly. In the lectures from the next session onwards we're going to do that on a SQL client which is my SQL workbench you have the instructions to install my SQL workbench in your message so please make sure to be ready with my SQL workbench again that is not a mandate if you're already working with SQL if you have any other client that you're using you're free to use that if you're more comfortable with the command line interface you're free to do that. But general recommendation would be to have at least one client present why that is good is because it gives us a holistic overview of what our database looks like what are different tables it gives us a clear visualization of our outputs so it's a better visualization tool that's it otherwise there's no advantage that you're going to get for using a SQL client. Now we're going to come back to a SQL database or my SQL in general but before we get to that let's talk about how SQL actually works. So the moment you will run SQL right running SQL what it means is it means starting a my SQL server. My SQL server is what is going to be used to interact with SQL that is where you're going to post your queries send your command right now your SQL database your SQL server does not contain the single database. There can be multiple present side of SQL server or any database server. Now why there is a requirement of multiple databases present on any SQL server because again is we have a microservices architecture right so there are different microservices if you want to distribute the data of each microservices into. Different different basically it is just a way of organization again there's a possibility that there might be multiple applications earning at the same time so to create a distinction between the data of each application we can have multiple databases even for the same application you can divide the data into multiple databases based on how you want to distribute that data again depends on the isolation level the logs the security protocols that you want to put into place multiple databases can be created. Now let's take an example so what we are doing is what all of you are doing is you are creating a student management system for SSD. What will be your core user persona to use this system will be the core user persona to manage not to manage to use this system the students can everybody give me a thumbs up imagine this to be a netlify dashboard. So the first thing that I would need to do is I would need to make sure to create a student profile. Now everybody can you help me in the chat with what are the must store or required data that I would want to store about a student for him or her or they or them to be a part of the netlify roll number. You roll number email email. Enrollment here very good. So my next question to all of you will be when you are working on an online portal is mobile phone a mandatory requirement phone number is that a mandatory requirement. But tell us still what we are going to do is we are going to store the phone number. I know we would want to put up a lot of other things like address data of course blah blah blah blah blah. All of that is not the mandatory requirements. So I am going to freeze the requirements to these five things. Now my next question to all of you is imagine forget everything forget everything that you are trying to design a database or database management system or whatever it is. Imagine back in 90s if this was a university there are only 10 students and rolling this university and you want to store the information of these 10 students. These five things about these 10 students how are you going to do that what will be your approach the most human the most intuitive way to store this data table. Anybody disagrees with this that name whether table name on a page fake one day and I will be going on. Yeah I would put all the names on one page then all the rule numbers in the other page all the emails on the next page. Can I say that the most intuitive most human way to store this data would be in the form of a table right. Email your batch and phone number. Anywhere on the keyboard. Anywhere on the name. Sorry. I was the name. The first message. What's the time. What's the word. What's the name. Coffee. No. Yeah. I can order a coffee or a jai here. We can do here. I've never tried that. I don't like it. Now. So this is the most human way in which we would want to organize our data as well for example roll number one. Email a bc at the rate ss t dot com enrollment areas 2000 consists of either. 25 batch a phone number. No, I will not. Oh name to bully him. Without name how will this work everyone. Of course, I will not. I'm going to add name as well here. I'm going to add name as well. We can but that is not something that we are sure that would be present in the email or not right. That's the format of email that is stored here in ss t but is that the standard way to create an email. I don't think so. So just again, these are not. This is not again as I said that we're not designing a database as of now. What is your name? I mean, it's like a query question who in this course, please freely ask those questions. This course is all going to be about discussions around what should be there. What should not be there? Why is it there? Why is it not there? I don't want this to be a boring course where I just come and tell you this is how it works. We're going to deliver this course in the most practical way that's possible. I'm going to make sure that by the end of this course all of you are. Hands on on at least this sequel database for sure. I'll go to. Unkits. XYZ at the rate. ss t.com 2020 25 bad c for number like something like this is how we humanly would store the data in the most intuitive way. And that is how data is present in a sequel or relational database management system. Sequel databases are also called as relational databases. And how is the data stored? Data is stored in the form of tables. Now what does a table or in any way sorry, not by message, goal, decently. But you're saying anything. At the end of the screen. We'll come to that. Allowed. Where allowed? Where allowed? We'll talk about that in a few moments. At some places it is allowed. Some places it is not allowed. Now when we talk about relational databases. Data is stored in the form of a table. Now what does a single table here represent? What is this table about? Can I say this is. So when we talk about any particular table right. In a relational database a table talks about an entity or a relationship. Now can anybody explain to me what an entity is? Anybody here can explain to me what an entity is. Any? Entry? No. Think independent of the table. Entity comes from the meaning of entity. English. English meaning of entity. Can explain the meaning of entity. Someone else is standing behind. Sir, can you explain to me? What do you think an entity might mean? No, I'd better have a word. Yes, on the right way. So Google, according to. And then. T is something that exists. Makes sense? Something that exists as a distinct independent unit. It's. Whether physically tangible or abstract, such as a person organization, object or even a concept. Which means entity is something that individually. Distinctive. Distinct independent existence. If it is there, we call that an entity. Now it does not have to be physical for it to be called as an entity. It can be physically tangible or it can be abstract as abstract as well. So here when I talk about an entity, student is an entity for me. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? Yes. In the SSD. Can anybody give me an example of something that is not physically tangible? Some. That can be called as an entity. A little. Just raise your hand. Stand up. Chill off. A kicker. But I said. Anybody can you give me an example of anything which is not physically tangible, but can be considered as an entity as a part of a physical entity which can be incorporated in your netlified entity. What has happened to you? Remember our first course on propositions. We have talked about a lot of media. Where did you get it from? I have not been able to talk about it for a long time. Sorry. Zords. Grades. Okay. Very good. Can I say course can also be called as an entity. Courses are table for courses can be called as an entity. Grades. Grades may not. Now think of individual grade. Okay. Will that be a property? Will that be an entry in any particular table for a particular course or will that be an independent entity of its own? Can I say grade is something that I would not call as an entity can everybody give me a thumbs up if you would agree with me on this? Grade does not exist independently. Grades are related to a student course relationship. A student when enrolled in a course will be graded. Courses are independent. So course can be called as an entity. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if what is entity makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Sorry. Faculty yes. So faculties can be an entity of its own. So the next entity that we are going to be talking about is the course entity. Now what is it that we are going to be having in the course entity? We are going to be having the course ID. We are going to having the course name. We are going to talk about which module this course is going to be a part of which air this course is going to be covered in. Okay. If you want you can also add the number of lectures in this course. Okay. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. Now along with course and student can I say I also need to keep track of which student is enrolled as a part of which course. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. So what is this? Will enrollment be considered as an entity? Is that independent? No. So let's say I have one more table here which is course enrollment. In which what I have is to represent the course what I have is I have the course ID. To represent a student what I have is I have the role number of the student ID. And what else would I need to store here? Is there anything else that I would need to store as a part of course enrollment for the student? Entry is table number tabitalling as a student will be enrolled in the course. Okay. So Boolean requirement thing. Now does this table represent the entity? Yes or no? No. Does not represent the entity. What this sense is absolutely correct. Someone said a relationship. Between two entities. So when we talk about a SQL database, a SQL database is not just represents an entity. It represents an entity as well as relationships between two entities. Everybody present in the session can you first of all give me a thumbs up if you are clear with how a SQL database stores the data. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if there is anything that does not make sense to anybody present in this session. Yes? Yes? No. So what is this phone number about this? Phone number is about the student. As a though, you can make a table. Rule number in name, one table, rule number in email, one table, rule number in year, one table, rule number and batch, one table, rule number and phone number, one table. But as a negating, what is the goal? The goal is if there is a student entity, everything which is solely the property or attribute of a student should be present in this table. Make sense? Everything that is solely and purely an attribute of this course should be present in this table. But whether a student is enrolled in a course or not, is that a property of a student? Is that an information about the student? No. Whether in a course a particular student is enrolled or not, is that an information about that course? Is that course metadata? No. That is a relationship between student and course. For that we have another table. Make sense? Take it. Now, if I go back to the student table, okay? Now everyone can you tell me, in any particular table in SQL, what does one column represents everyone? Sorry? Go ahead and say, anybody, just raise your hands and say, what does a column represents? Property. Right? So, every column in a table represents a property or attribute of the entity. Now, can you tell me, what does a row represent? Anybody, what does one row represent? One? No. Entity is a word that we are going to use for a table. Entity is not an individual student, okay? Student is not an entity. One student is not an entity. Student entirely, all the students together is a student entity. Okay? What do we store in a row? What do we call it? We call it every single row will store one record or entry of the entity. We call one single row, one record. One single row will give you all the information that you have about one student. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Okay. Now, let's say one day, one day, what happens is, you are using the Netlify dashboard, okay? Now, using the Netlify dashboard, what you encounter is that the Netlify dashboard is very slow, extremely slow. Extremely slow to the point that you log in and you have to wait for 10 minutes to just for the first homepage to appear. You do a diagnosis, all the APIs that you have written, all are very efficient. You have written the best code, Python, fast APIs, sub, you made the best decisions. Everything is working perfectly fine. But still, the load time is very, very slow. So, think about what might be the problem and what you realize is that it is taking a lot of time for the data to be fetched from your databases. So, now, what you do is you look at your SQL queries. All of your queries are also optimized. Everything is good there. Still, your database is taking a lot of time to return the data. So, can I say that one probability might be that the way that we have organized the data distributed the data into multiple tables, that might not be efficient. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense for all of you present in the session? Can I say that might be a possibility, right? I would want to check that out as a part of my diagnosis. Yes? Now, do we able to check any particular database, the structure of a database? Do I need the complete table for me? Do I need the entire table to be printed? Let's say you have the data of 10,000 students present in the table. Do you need the data of all of the 10,000 students to be able to understand how the data is stored distributed, structured into a database? No. What is it that you need? Can I say what you need is you need to know the list of tables and what is the structure of each and every table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. And that is what does the schema of a table. So what do we have in the schema of a table? In the schema of a table, the first thing that I have is... I have the best words in my book. Okay. So, schema of a table talks about what columns exist in a table? What data types they have and what rules apply? Which means when we are talking about any particular table, to be able to define the structure of the table, first of all what I need is, what are going to be all the attributes in the table? The second thing, just like how in for very code we need to define the data type of a variable here as well, for every attribute we would need to define the data type of that user. That it is an integer string, a date type, a character, what data type we will be using, we have to define that. So the first two points are clear to me. The third point talks about what rules apply? Anybody can you help me with what would be the meaning of a rule in a data base like what kind of rules are we talking about here for a particular table? Can duplicate exist anything else? That's correct. Anything else? Number of entries is not a rule. So these rules do not apply to the table, these rules apply to the columns. So can you think of what else I might want to use or what rules I might want to create for a column? That can be a rule yes. No, that's the data type. That's defined by the data type. So if you define the column to be an integer, all the values in that column has to be an integer. Each column can have its own unique data type, but once you define the data type while creating a table, you have to make sure to give those type of data only into that column. Does it have to be? No. No, well, you mean right between the right and the right. The current way should be what should be the primary key of the table? Anything else? The column cannot be null. So let's come back to the student table and try to think about what are the different types of rules that I would want to put into place. That is also something that we can define as a rule. Generally, those type of business logics we keep in the code. Generally, we don't try to introduce those logics in the database. Why? Again, very slow memory. Operations becomes very slow. So any type of calculated logics that we want to do, we would keep that in our main memory, our code. Now, coming back to this, the first and the most important rule that needs to be defined for every single table is what is called as the primary key of the table. Can anybody help me understand what a primary key is? Unique ID. Does it always needs to be ID only? Does it have to be a role number only? No, any sort of ID does it have to be? Absolutely correct. So primary key is a unique identifier for a record in a database table. Ensuring that no two rows are identical and no value in the key column is null. What I mean by that is, one more advantage of using databases as a database management system or database is the medium to two rows. The medium to store the data is that in Excel everyone or in CSV, is it possible for us to make sure to constrain that duplicate entries cannot be present in the Excel in the CSV? Generally what we do have is we have a feature to extract only the unique values from a particular table or from a particular sheet but we cannot restrict duplicate values. Now does it make sense to have a null present 100 times into a table? Does it make sense? Does it make sense to have the entry for a null present 100 times in the student table? We would want to ensure that if a null is the student once, a null is the entry should only be present once. But can there be two null in a batch in a year? So we need, now a null is a name can be present multiple times within a table. But we need to make sure we have a way to distinguish between a null one and a null two or a null three. How are we going to do that? By a unique identifier which is going to be rolled number in our cases. So whenever we define a table we have to make sure we define one of the columns of the table as a primary key of the table. And primary key is going to be the attribute that is going to be used to uniquely identify entry into or any record present in a table in an entity. All the 200 people in the session are thumbs up if this makes sense to all of your thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. You have to define which table has to be the primary key. But now can I say even there is a possibility that we might have a type of data where there is no entry that can be unique, no entry that can be considered or no property that can be considered as a primary key. For example here in this table let's say I did not had the roll number. I was only talking about name, year and batch. Can any of the entries be unique? Can the name of two people in the same batch and rolled in the same year be same or not? It can be same. So in those type of cases how do I ensure a primary key is present in the table? In those type of cases even though roll number might be might not be present right internally within the system. What we do is we are going to create an attribute which we will call as student ID which is going to be unique for each entry each row. We will have to create a column like that. So every table, every entity in a SQL database in a relational database must have a primary key. What is a primary key? Unique. Identifier. For a record in a database table. Now primary key has a couple of properties, a couple of attributes that couple of rules that needs to be followed which is the primary key need to be unique. For every entry the primary key has to be unique. The second property about a primary key is it cannot be null. Primary key for any particular entry cannot be null. Now one very important thing for us to understand is that it is not necessary for just one column or one property to be a primary key. Okay. Primary key can also be a combination of multiple columns in which case we call it as a composite key. So primary key can first of all only one primary key per table which means in one table there can only be one primary key that is present. Primary key can be a combination of multiple columns as well. For example, when I will talk about the course enrollment table where I have the course ID and the rule number. Will one course ID only be present in the course enrollment table once? So when can one course ID be present only once in the course enrollment table when only one student will be enrolled in one course? Is that going to be the case? No. One student multiple students are going to be enrolled in one course so the course ID will be present multiple times. Will the rule number be present only once in the course enrollment? Will one student only be enrolled in one course? No. The rule number will also be present multiple times. So can course ID be called as the primary key of this table? Yes or no? No. Can the rule number be called as the primary key of this table? No. But the combination of course ID and rule number can that be called as the primary key of this table? Will one student be enrolled in the course only once? Usmay be I know we have an exception if I fail to go to the fits 7. But I will talk about that. But enrollment on a strict level will only be once for student. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? So in that case the combination of course ID and rule number will be our primary key. Okay? Super. What other type of constraints I might have on the column? So primary key itself told me the different types of constraints that I have on any particular column. Can the email idea of two people be same? Yes or no? No. Which means this column has to be unique. Now because you are enrolling yourself into an online system can the email idea of any person be null? Can any person register without an email ID? No. They need to have an email ID which means email ID also needs to be not a null. So these are the type of rules. These are the type of constraints that we define for each and every column. So rules are defined per column. We will talk about the syntax. We will talk about everything. This was just a generic discussion to understand what rules are. And when you combine all these three things together for a table that is what is called as the schema of a table. And when you put the schema of all the tables together that is what is called as a schema of a database. And that is what we would be designing in the four lectures on schema design. What tables are there? How many tables you have distributed your data into what attributes are going to be present in each table? What will be the constraints on each and every attribute? What relations are present in the table and all of that? Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up. If everything that you have discussed so far is crystal clear to all of you, thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Yes or no? So I just have one requirement from all of you before the next session. If there is anybody who would come to the session without that requirement, you would not be allowed into the session which is, I want all of you to have my SQL installed in your system. If you are going to be facing any issues that is totally fine, take help with anybody who has completed the installation. You have so many people present here, you can do that. If not at least make sure that you have tried to install it. If there will be any issue, I will help you resolve that in the next session. But then some precious time of the class that you can spend on writing queries, understanding queries will be wasted your time. I will not make sure everybody's time is wasted. I will not waste your time intentionally as well. What I am saying is that I will come to you once I have given the problem statement to everybody and explained. What they need to do in the lab session. Now, one very good resource for you to practice SQL queries is what are we going to do? Where are we going to write our SQL queries? Like out of habit for any OS course or something else you have used that. For SQL, we are going to make sure we discuss every single thing in the session. But as you know that if I explain a function, there can be 20 different ways of writing that function with 20 different small changes in the parameter. This is a resource where you will get everything documented in one place together. Please make sure to visit this website as much as possible. Use this for your SQL query references. Sometimes error, I do not understand. I have to do a chat GPDs for the first time. Go and look at the actual syntax. Try to see what you are doing wrong. Please don't make yourself dependent on these AI tools for everything. A little bit of cognitive development is very important. I know they make us efficient, they make us fast. If you are not able to help, then you would just be RHGPD. We don't have to be that set. At least if you have any syntactic error, please go to this. Try to refer to this. Look at the correct syntax. Try to see what you are not doing correctly. Try to understand the errors. Build a little bit of a cognitive skill. That is going to be helpful for all of you. Again, last time I have a request, please make sure to come to the session next time with mySQL at least installed. Workbench if you want to install or not, that is up to you. You can use the CLI as well. But please make sure to have mySQL installed. Now what we are going to do is we are going to get started with the first SQL query. Now take my stats. Send them to the command. Watch them. Everybody able to see my terminal. So, this is basically what we did as a practice for your 27 batch for their placement. So, what we did was, okay, okay, okay, okay. So, what we did was, I gave them a schema of college placement portal. I already gave them the list of tables that are going to be present in the schema and how they are just tables. So, we created a database, we use the database, we created all of those tables, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 tables, totally recreated. Then I gave them some sample data as well. So, I gave them the queries, play written to insert the values into that database. And then what we did was, we practiced a lot of these insert, may work, yeah, we done. Then what we did was, we practiced all of these queries that can help us retrieve the data. So, this is similar to what we are going to be doing in our course as well, okay. So, first of all, whenever you will be connecting to your MySQL server, okay, once you have installed the server and made sure that the SQL server is running, then what you are going to be doing is, going to be using, if you are using CLI, then you are going to be using this command to connect to your MySQL server. MySQL minus U root minus P, password, whenever you will be performing an installation of the MySQL server is where or whenever you will be installing MySQL is where you will have to enter a password, which will be your root password for the MySQL, okay. Now, to be able to see the database, which database are we using or how many databases are actually present, what we can do is, we can just run a command, show databases. Conconcent databases, 2029 SQL Group CE batch, 29 college placement, these are all the databases. Some of them are present by default, some of them we create, okay. No one, nothing is related to your batch, so what I am going to do is, I am going to create a new database. So, when you will be working with SQL for the first time, you will have to create your own database. What are the syntax for that? Data database and the database name, okay. 2029 SQL Group A. Don't forget to add a semicolon at the end now again. The semicolon is required in some cases, for example, from MySQL semicolon is required. For some SQL databases, it is optional, okay. But if you are applying it, there is no mistake. It would not be incorrect if you will use a semicolon anywhere, okay. Now what we are going to do, now we have created the database, but right now we are not using this database, right now we are not inside this database. So, what we would need to do is, we would need to use this database. So, what is the command for that? Use database name and database. And now we are in this database. Now to start with what we are going to check is, we are going to check, is there any particular table present in the database or not? Syntax for that, show tables. Sorry. Apologies little bit for the spelling mistakes that I am going to make because when I write the code, I am unable to see what I am writing. The cubiger who is there will just point it out or I will be right and correct it. So, when I use show table, what it is giving me is it is giving me an empty set, which means right now there are no tables present in the database, which is expected because we have just created this database as well, okay. Now what do we need to do? We are going to create our first table, okay. So, before we start creating our first table, here if you see right, show tables, use all of these are SQL keywords. All of these are SQL keywords and all of the SQL keywords are case insensitive, which means whether you write it in capital, so you write it in small, that is totally fine. The only thing that is case sensitive in SQL databases is the names of the attributes, table databases that we are creating. Again, in some versions even that is case insensitive, but in general any names that we are assigning to any column, any table, any database, that is the only thing that will be case sensitive in your databases, okay. So now we are going to get started with the first query, which is to create a table. Let me add this syntax to create the database as well. So first we are going to quickly write what the SQL create database command is and that is very simply, here copycure is not going to be, create database and the database name, okay. Now let us talk about what is this syntax to create a SQL table. So what is the syntax to create the SQL table, that is also very easy, very simple to remember, very simple to understand, okay. Yes. I am going to write these commands, okay. It is going to be very difficult for me to switch again, again. So for just for a reference you can just look at it. The reason why I am copy-pasting this here is so that you have a reference when I upload these nodes. Otherwise I am going to write the command properly into the screen that I am sharing so that we can see how the command gets executed, right. So here the syntax of creating a table would be create table, then the table name column 1, its data type is constrained, which is basically the name of the column 1, which data type the name is having and the constraint, comma column 2, its data type is constrained, comma column 3, its data type is constrained. So let us try to write our first SQL query, okay. What is it that we are going to do? We are going to create a student table, okay. Create table, table name is student, then a bracket opens. Now 1 by 1 we are going to give the name of all of the attributes that we want in the student table, okay. So Now what does this means? So what I have done is the first attribute, the first column in my student table is the student ID, data type is an integer, okay. Now what I have written is I have written this constraint or this rule which is called as auto increment. What does auto increment do? What is the rule of the auto increment keyword? Exactly. So for columns, as I said right, there are going to be a lot of cases where in the data that I am going to insert, none of those are going to represent an ID for a student, none of those are going to represent an ID for that entry, there would not be any primary key. In that case what I do is I just create an auto increment column. There what is going to happen is the first entry that you create, the first entry that you insert, it is going to get inserted with the value 1. Second entry with the value 2, third entry with the value 3. So the ID is going to get auto incremented for every entry that you insert into or every record that you insert into this table. And this ID is also the primary key. Everybody a thumbs up with this makes sense to all of you? Yes. Then the next is So now I have done a second attribute is the name which is varcat. Can anybody tell me what varcat is? Yes. So basically this is the data that we use for a string in our constraints, in our attributes for a table. What is this 20 here represents? Not length, maximum permissible length. So you cannot insert a name with more than 20 characters in this attribute. Now. Sorry. Random. I feel that in my system I would not have someone whose name is more than 20 characters long. If it is then my system will break. So that's the decision that you have to make. This is the reason for it to be 20. Email coming in 30. So this is random. You can choose what you want. What is the maximum permissible length that you want? So let's take a look at the dimensions. Now here everyone. I am going to provide. One more constraint to my email which is email is going to be a varcat with maximum length of 30. It is it cannot be a null and it will be unique which means there cannot be any duplicate entries inserted into my email column. What else batch? What happened sir? What? You? You are eating something and you are eating something. Wow! It is good. You can sit here. Yes. And you have to sit here tomorrow. What's your name? Say it again. Pesson. Roll number? Yes. Okay. I need to see this next session from tomorrow. B1. No, no. I will not get any attendance in any session. Okay, Pesson? Good. What size do you think in the character? Character means character. What does character mean? A character. Now you have to put your friends here. You have to put your friends here. Yes, I will tell you. You have to use the character. It is correct. Everyone please look this side. Oh, sorry. Okay. Can you read the question? If you want to read the question. You have to read the question name. you can store the country codes separately and number as an integer. So decision making the badminton. Now we syntax. Everybody please have a look at the syntax and tell me does this make sense to everybody present in the session. Yes, and no. Here the only parameter that can be null into my table is the contact number. Everybody quick thumbs up with this is here to all official we run this query. Okay. Now let's see. How many tables are present in my database now? Student table is present in my database now the first table has been created. Now you can look at the schema of a table by using the describe or d s c command as well. Which will give you the entire schema of that table. Student ID, integer cannot be null is the primary key default value will be null. No use me null. No, you will find if you will not give any default value by default will be null here. Otherwise when you will try to insert a value try to give a null as for the student ID you will directly get an error that insertion was not possible. Name, where care cannot be a null. Nothing else. Email, where care cannot be a null. It is going to be a unique attribute. And like that. Everybody thumbs up with the first SQL command is crystal clear to all of you. And what is the database management system is making sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Now for the next session just one requirement which is as I have said please make sure to have my SQL installed on your systems. Secondly if time permits please try to explore the syntax of the basic queries which is create insert update and delete. Create table insert into a table delete from a table and update from a table. These four queries please try to explore and come in the next session with that people that is it from my side in today's class. Thanks a lot. I have even for join the session.