you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you I Again, before we start a bigger question is has everybody installed mySQL in your systems? Yes, it is running, your validated, it is running. That's great. So, if that makes sense to all of you, before we start writing our first SQL query ourselves, let's take a moment to look at a couple of important. Which is in SQL as we discussed in the last session, there can never be define a schema. Whenever we define a table, there are three things that we need in that table. First is what columns are going to be present, which is the column names. Second is the data type of the column, which means what type of data would exist in that column for all the records. And third was the rules. So, here we are going to talk about a couple of those data types and those rules as well. Now, these are not the only available data types, there are a lot of other data types available as well in SQL, which I would want all of you to explore on the V3C. So, if you go to the V3C, you will get data type, you will get many more data types for spring, many more data types for numerical. But I am going to cover the ones that are most important and that are the ones that we are going to be using most frequently. Right? So, first of all, let's come to spring records. So, A, we want to create a string. There are these four most common data types for string. Again, there is one more, which is more common, which is called as a text, which is used for longer strings. Basically, something like a paragraph or something if you want to store, then we use the text. Otherwise, the first string data type is KAR and in the bracket, we provide the size of the KAR. Now, there is no requirement to provide the size, if you do not give the size, the default value of the size will be 1, which means if you just write batch and KAR as the data type, it is just going to take one character there. We have done that as well in the last class when we created the student table. Right? Now, if you create it with a size of KAR, what does it mean? It creates a fixed length string of the given size, which means if you have created a KAR of size 5, all the strings in that column for every single record must be of the length 5. It cannot be of the length 1 or 2 or 3 or 4. It must be of the length 5. It is a fixed size string. But my question to all of you will be, let's say if I want to store the name of all the students in the batch, is the length of the name going to be fixed for every single student? No. I can give a maximum cap that, oh, this is the maximum number of characters that I can store, or I can think of might be present in one given name. But there is no guarantee there, right? So, what I am going to do is, in that case, I am going to declare a batch. So, where can it be variable length string, where whatever size that you provide is the maximum size of the string that can be stored in that attribute. The size varies from 0 to 65535. So, this is the maximum size of a string that you can create using the Wad-Camp. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes. Then we have another data type which is called as binary, in which again, binary is a fixed size string with only 0s and 1s. There is also a Wad-Binary, which is a variable size string, variable size binary string with 0s and 1s. Now, anybody knows what this enum is. Anybody can explain to me what an enum is? Anyone? No? So, let me give you an example to explain enum properly. Okay. In the last session what we did was, we created the student stable. Okay? Now, in this student stable, we created the batch to be a CAD. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you? Yes. Now, if I am creating the batch to be a character, what are the possible values that I can insert in a character? What values can I insert in a character? Sorry? A2Z. Is this what I can store in a character data type? Can I say any alphabet, small or caps, any number, any special symbol? I can store that in a character. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? How many batches or groups do you have here in that 2029 batch? So, available values are only A, B and C. But is there any restriction in place that will only allow me to put A, B and C there? If I declare it to be a character, do I have any restriction? Can I put an entry for a student with a batch Z in the table? Yes. But will that be a valid entry for the 2029 batch? No. And that is where enums comes into the picture. So enum is a string data type where while creating the table with defined the list of value, that is acceptable for all of these batches. For example, if you create a large, we have a column with value A, B and C. Only A, B and C will be acceptable for this batch. Because I think that you are going to get an entry. Everybody here comes up if the enum data type makes sense to all of you present in the session. So whenever you need to have an input from a fixed defined set of values is where we use enum. Great? Then we have a lot of numerical data types as well. For example, bit default value is 1. If you create a bit, it can be 0 or 1. Or at max, you can create a 64 bit number as well. 64 bit numerical entry. Tiny in can store numbers from minus 128 to 128. Now, what does the size here represents in tiny entry? Anybody wants to guess? What does the size here represents for a tiny entry? Yes, yes. Sorry? Many. What I am asking is, when I need to give size in the parameter, let's say I need to find this, tell you what does that mean? Yes? Yes, what do you say? Yes. So, what does the size here represents? For example, in the A posterior size, it is in the unknown error type. Here, we have the enum data type. The size represents the range that this data type will be able to store. For example, right now, I have the default range from minus 128 to 128. Meaning, total 256, sorry, minus 128 to 127. Total 256 different values can be represented in this range. But, if let's say I give the input of the size to be 128, then that does not means the maximum value that I can store will be 128. No. It is only capable of storing 128 integers now, which means the range will be from minus 64 to 63. Can everybody give me a yes, if this makes sense to all of you? Then we have a rule for the whole area of data type, both the parameters are in the data type. Zero means false, non-zero means true, right? Then we have small int or integer, both of these again small int, medium int, tiny int, all of these are integer data types used specifically based on the range of integers that you want to store. It just optimizes on the space, okay? The last one is the decimal data, this is very important for the store. I think you have added a bit of discussion around decimal, I am not sure. But, what decimal store is? In decimal, you need to give three to parameter. Size and D. Size talks about the total number of digits present in the decimal before and after the decimal combined together. For example, if you put the value of size equal to 3, this will give you like 11.0. Total number of digits combined will be 3, okay? Begin is also there, yes. So, that is what I am saying about, right? Depends on what is the range that you maximum number that you want to represent, we decide the data type of the numerical attribute. Now, D talks about the maximum number of digits or the number of digits that you want to store after the decimal, okay? And one that I want you people to explore is the double data type. And I want you to read what is the difference between decimal and double data. Both are used to store floating point numbers only, both are used to store decimal numbers. But, we read what is the difference between decimal and double data type. There was also one more data type which was called as float, but float has been deprecated and will be removed in the future versions of SQL. So, there is no point talking about that. And the last type of data type that we have is data time data type. So, data time data types are used to store the dates and time. Date data type stores the date in the format here, month and date. And the range is from 1000 0 to 99 9 9 9 12 13. Now, my question to all of you is, can anybody think and tell me why? From the childhood, when we have been writing the date in the copy and pen, we have been writing day month year. Why, wherever we store the data, we write year month year. Why, what is the advantage that you get because of doing it like this? If you do not communicate in the copy, the data type is provided to people to not hear. Say, if it is something that we do manually, then it is easier to read it from the right or from the left right. It makes no difference for me, it is no greater. Why, when storing the date, we store the year first. So, let us say what you have is you have a very big data set in which the date is provided for each entry and you want to sort the entries in the basis of the dates. Which parameter would you give precedence to sort date, month or year? Year. That is why this is the format in which we store the date. So, that when you start sorting in the lexographical order from the left to the right, precedence is first given to the year. So, basically all the dates with lexate 2001 are going to come first. Then in 2001, we are going to have all the months sorted. Then in each month, we are going to have all the days sorted. Then we also have a date time format in which you have the days in the same format and time in the RR minute, minute, second, second format. And for the time, the range is 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, to 269, 29, 29. Which means it is a 24 hour clock that we store. Which that is absolutely correct because it is easy to sort. And then we have data types like time and year as well. Where you, if you specifically just want to store the timestamp, you can use the time data type. If you specifically want to store the year, you can use the year data type. Now, now everyone, these are the major data types that is presented my SQL. But as you have discussed in the last session that my SQL is not the only relational database management system. There are a lot of other relational database management system. One most common one is post-grad SQL. The reason why post-grad SQL is becoming very popular is because of the optimizations that it has made on top of the existing my SQL. For example, post-grad SQL supports a lot of additional data types. Please explore those data types. For example, it also has a lot of support for monetary data types. It has a lot of support for binary data types. For example, if you want to store a hexadecimal string, if you want to store an optimal string, it has a support for that. It has a support for time zones as well. It has a support for interval inputs as well. It has a support for geometrical types as well. For example, points, line segments, boxes, paths, polygons, circles. It has inbuilt support for network address types as well. Your iNet, CI, CADR, IP addresses, Mac addresses. It has a support for text search types. It has a support for XML data types, JSON data types, arrays, composite data types, range types. So what post-grad SQL has done is it has added all of these features on top of your traditional SQL to make it more efficient to be used in a lot of situations. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes, that's great. Now let's talk about a couple of keywords that we're going to be using very, very frequently. So these A, Evert, again, are a couple of more, but these A are the ones that we're going to be using most frequently, which is first is the default keyword. The default keyword is what we use to assign a default value to any attribute when we're going to create a team. Descending DEC is a date is a keyword that we're going to be using if whenever we're going to retrieve a result, if we want to sort the result in the decreasing order based on any parameter, this is the data type that we're going to be using. Distinct keyword is what we will be using to retrieve distinct values from any attribute that we are fetching from the data. For me, I'll talk about that in a moment. Index, we will talk about it in the later session. Index is basically a very powerful tool that helps us in optimizing the searching. To give you a little bit of context, all of you must know about the reverse index in that Google uses. Kind of soon now, maybe. We will talk about what index is indexing is properly by taking one complete session to discuss indexing. Notional units are both constraints that we define on any particular attribute to means on a very sort of entry into a particular table. The entries for any particular attribute cannot be done which means you need to provide an entry for that application. You need to make sure that duplicate entries are not allowed for any particular application for any set up. And try to make sure all of us are already ready. Now, before moving on to actual queries, let's talk about keys. So, there are different types of keys that are defined for any particular data base. The most linear one is a super. So, what I have here is another super table. Super E is any set of attributes that uniquely identifies a record or a tuple. Records are also called as tuples which means any set any combination of attributes that we need to better we will call that a super. For example, if I take the ID name and charge of all those students, will that give me a unique record? Is that combination of attributes going to give me one unique student? Yes. If I take the name and email, will that give me one single record? Yes. So, these are some examples of super. Now, we have another concept which is called as candidate candidate key is a minimal super which means if I look at both the examples of the super keys in the first example ID name and batch are all of these three attributes required to uniquely identify any attribute. Can you tell me the minimal set of attributes that is required to uniquely identify any attribute? For the first example, only ID that becomes a candidate key. From the second example, only email that becomes a candidate key. And what is primary key? Primary key is a special candidate key that we choose to uniquely identify attributes in a tree. So, for any table that we are going to create, we will have to define a primary key for that particular table. You cannot create a table without a primary key. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? There has to be some way to uniquely identify a record. There has to be some distinction between each record that is present in the database. Now, what are the properties of a primary key? First thing, it is going to be unique. Second, it is going to be normal and third, it is going to be minimal, which means it's going to be a candidate key. Now, I have given the last point before we start with the session. That's up to you. That's basically a database design that we do. That is what this next discussion is going to be all about. So, I will come back to the student course and course enrollments. First of all, with this making sense to enable the code and enrollment is related to some of the attributes that are set to be. It is not at the end of the key. Now, now, when I come to the student and the course, can I say if these are the attributes that I have in the student table? Naturally, the whole number is what feels like what should be the primary key for the student table? Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you? You can take email as well, but let's say we stick to roll number. Then we go to the courses table. Can I say that for the courses table, the course code is what is going to be unique for every single course and let's say we assume the course code to be a primary key. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now, what does a finding of primary key is? A finding of primary key is now, whenever a presentation of any entry of the course will be required anywhere in this system, okay. We are not going to store everything about that code in that particular, that is in the presentation of the course. What we are going to do is our course code will be the representation of that particular entry in the course table. Our whole number will be the representation of that particular entry in the course table. Can everybody give me a yes of this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now, now we are going to give the course enrollment table, but about this identity does not, so in the course enrollment table, what I have is I have a whole number, course code and the grade that the student is going to get in that course. So, this table stores the list of all the students enrolled in all the courses and the grade, the final grade that they got into that particular course. Now, we have a student 25 DCS 1005. Can I say for these entry for this course, we are going to be 25 DCS 1005 in the course enrollment table and anybody give me a yes of this, yes. Again, when I talk about any particular course code as well, let us talk about DSM 101, a six character string, okay. DSM 101 as well, when we talk about all the students enrolled in DSM 101, in one year approximately you are 670 students, right. So, DSM 101 as an entry will be present 670 times in the course enrollment table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you, but is that required? Is that reputation wastage of memory first to follow yes or no? Yes. So, how do we avoid that? The way we avoid that is simply by creating a unique integer ID as an attribute for every single table. Now, this ID has no meaning outside the scope of this database. There is no student with the ID 1 or us, we only know student with the role number, but now what this will solve for us is, whenever internally any other table we have to store the details of any particular student ID. Instead of storing the role number, what we are going to do is, we are going to store the student ID. Instead of storing the course code, we are going to store the course ID. And what this will do is for all of these 12 entries, it is going to remove this 10 length string and insert just store a small integer. Everybody present in the session, can you give me a thumbs up if this approach makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Again, this is a general practice, it is not required that you do that the earlier version was also absolutely correct. So, generally when we will be creating any particular table, what we would be doing is, we would be creating a integer ID or every single table. And that is what would be the final priority to that with the first. Let us general practice that we follow whenever we divide the info. Again, because the general practice, it is not a complete hierarchy, let us totally find. But imagine our data space where millions of entries are present. And imagine the optimization that this will bring to that table in terms of space. Now, talking about the last concept which is foreign key. Here everyone, let us say, we just create a course enrollment table. And in the course enrollment table, we are creating a mapping between a student and a course. It is a relationship between a student and a course. Everybody a thumbs up if this is making sense to all of you first or foremost. Yes. Now, right now, this table course enrollment is not linked to the course or the student table in any way. There is no direct link that is present. We are just touring the relationship, but there is no official link that is present. So, now let us say in the course ID, I have five courses with the ID 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. But in the course enrollment table, while inserting the data, by mistake, instead of the course ID 5, I insert the course ID 6. Will I get any error in that case? Will I get any error in that case? No, right. This will be an integer column. You can insert any integer that you want into that column. So, how do I make sure to avoid these type of error? The way that I avoid these type of errors is by using a concept called as a foreign key. What is a foreign key? The foreign key constraint establishes a link between two tables and prevent actions that is destroyed the link between them. So, here in the course enrollment table, we know that any entry in the role number in the course enrollment table should be coming from the role number in the or any entry in the student ID in the course enrollment table should be coming from the student ID in the student's table. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you? Yes. Any ID, course ID in the enrollment table should be coming from the student ID. So, foreign key helps us in creating these links. Now, a foreign key in a column is a column in a table that refers to the primary key in another table, which means here if I create student ID to be a foreign key for this particular table, if I refer it to another table's attribute, that attribute needs to be a primary key of that table. So, tell me is the student ID a primary key of the student table? That was the purpose of creating the student ID, right? Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you? Yes or no everyone? Yes, take it. Similarly, in the course table as well, the course IDs are primary key and that is also what we will create as a foreign key of this table. So, one table can have multiple different foreign keys. Keep in mind, one table can only have one primary key. That primary key can be a combination of the attributes, but there will only be one primary key in every table, right? Now, the last point, the table with the foreign key column is called the child table and the table with the primary key column is called the reference or the parent table. So, here the course enrollment table will have these foreign keys, student ID and course ID. So, this will be called as the child table. Now, where are the foreign key references coming from? Student ID is coming from the students and course ID is coming from the course. So, these will become your parent or reference tables. Everybody present in the session, can you give me a yes if the concept of foreign key makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Yes. Now, if you create student ID and course ID as foreign keys in the course enrollment table, what benefit will this give us? There are two benefits or two safety takes that they have been introduced by a code and to apply for it. Say, if it is a government, now you do not be able to insert any student ID that is not relevant to the student ID. You do not be able to insert any code ID that is not relevant to the board. So, whereas for any enrollment, it has to be a valid student and a valid group. Everybody come to this big school. Yes or no? Yes. Secondly, what we will call into two is to model, let us say what I call into is I want to begin the codes from the system. But, in the course enrollment table, I already have 10,000 students who have worked in the course of the course. Let us say I want to begin the course of the course ID. If I begin the course of the course, I need to begin the course of the course of the course. And the entry is still present in the course enrollment table, what comes and might happen. So, let us say I will begin the course enrollment table, I will try to finish the weekend of one quarter of your school back in the 12th year. But, I will try to start the course of the course, the course ID is the course. Now, I will go to the course of the course table and I search for course ID. Yes, this is the case, I will give you an interview, yes, this is the case, this is the case. This is the case, yes, this is the case. Yes, I will continue, but in the course of the course, I will continue. So, that is also what I will do for the course. For the course ID will not let any entry from the page table until unless the references are present in the child. There are many things to do that by those type of the read operations, which will make sure all the entries get shared in the company. So, everybody in terms of people in terms of the course, currently is crystal clear to all of you. Thumbs down, if there is anything that does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Sorry, you have made a mistake in the session. It is okay. I have a request, but I do not think so because I am using it as well. So, now what I am going to do is, everybody present in the session, can you please open my secret? Yes, I am going to open my secret. Everybody present in the session, can you please open the file that I have shared with you? It is a hack, empty document, everyone can please open that. Yes. Now, first I want all of you to open my secret. You can open it on a workbench, you can open it on CLI, whatever you are comfortable with. Sorry? Yes, yes. So, please open my secret. If you are using CLI, the command for that is my secret, space minus u, host, space minus u, root space minus u, and then enter the password that you have created while it is finally minute. Now, create any database of your choice, you can put any name. I have already created the database for your group. So, the syntax will simply be create CREAT, database, DATA, B-A-S-E, space the name of your database, and then semicolon, then enter. Everybody got an OK to database created, yes. Now, we are going to use that database. So, use and the database name. Now, you will get something like database, here switch to your desired database. Now, what I want all of you to do is I want all of you to do show tables. When you show tables, I have been given because we created it in the last session, but you will not have any table present in your database. You will get an empty set as an output. Everybody got that? That is what you got. Those are default databases. You do not have to use any of those. You have to create your own database and then start. Now, everybody present in the database. You have to create a database. Now, everybody present in the database. Please go over the argument and I have to add to it. Take your eight minutes, use the view of the multiple other database and try to create all the tables that I have made. We have already used the syntax for three different tables. You already have to do that. What is the format of the query? All you have to do is you have to go into search the database or that. I have made sure that proper data type convention in the document for the data. If you just data into a table, then you have to go take it out with the link and then you will go try to create the data from the databases in all possible database. And why do you not use the software database as the database? I will try to understand which attributes are present in which. In the last session, there was one very important concept that we discussed, which was one single server is divided into one table data. Everybody present in the session, it will give me a thumbs up with this mixture and store the data. Yes or no? Everyone please look at the screens. Yes or no? Okay. So when I do this show databases, this is the list of all the databases that are present in my system. Everybody a thumbs up if that makes sense to all of you? Yes, which means this is this entire figure. These are not my tables. Make sense to everyone? Super. Now what I have to do is I need to go inside one of those databases. I need to start using one of these databases. How am I going to do that? Again, if you don't have a database already present, what you first need to do is in your SQL server, you need to create a database. What is the syntax for that? C-R-E-A-T-E-D-A-T-A-B-A-S-E, create database and then the name of your database. Everybody who has not done that, can you please create a new database in your SQL server now? Okay. Now once you have created that database, we need to switch to that database. We need to go into that database. We are going to do use keyword, U-S-E and then again the name of the database, which is in my case 2029 SQL group A. You will get a message like database change, which means you have switched to that database. Now within this database, we have to create all of these tables. Everybody present in the session a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present the yes or no? Yes. Now what are the tables that we need to create? Yes, these are the tables that we need to create. This is the table name, table number one, departments. These are the attribute names, department ID, department name and building and these are the constraints. So this is the data type and these are the constraints, primary key, auto increment, not null, unie, not null. So these five tables are what you need to create in your system. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. People if there is any confusion, please call me to your tables. I will come, I will explain. But please try to create these tables. It is 1217. You have time to 122728. If you want to see what tables you already created, you can use the command show for that. Show tables will give you this command the name. If you want to create a scheme of any table, you can use the command D, S, D, S, D, S, D, and the table. And this data is what we will keep on updating in each and every session. We will keep on calling by using each and every session to make it more complex. So if we don't learn more and more concepts on the table. Okay. If I remember the example, there is data in the database as well. But in that case, the allocation for the result and the user play. And even though we have the point, it is pretty good. I think the document has a lot of sense. It has to be a certain type of document. Cool. If you know, start reading, he is able to talk about it. Sir, today is Priyans's birthday. Priyans are coming. Happy birthday Priyans. Okay. But you are celebrating. I am not going to be kidding. I am not going to be kidding. Now, what I am also going to do is I am also going to share one more document with all of you. Where you will also have the queries that you need to use to create these tables. So even if anyone has not been able to create the tables, anybody wants a reference on how or what will be the command to create the tables. I have shared another document with all of you. Again, I am going to explain all of the queries one by one. So let's start with the first table, which is your department's table. Now, what is the syntax for a real table to be that create table and then the table. There are only private and one by one we give comma separated attributes and there data type constraints. So the table mentioned these three attributes department ID whose data type was an integer, which was also the primary key. And what I have here is auto increment. How many of you know what auto increment is? What auto increment is and actually you do not have to give input by reading this entry. It is an internal data. The first entry is this table and then we assign the one. The same entry is this table and we assign it to our entry. We assign it to the three and so on. So you will automatically be at the, you will see when we will insert the data into the department's table, we will only insert the department name and the building. We will not give the department ID that it auto assigned by the table by the database. Now, let's try to run this and see department's table is creative. Now, let's create this student's table. So create table through this student ID which is in your primary key and auto increment. Roast number, where care not null unique student name, where care not null email, where care not null unique phone, where care unique gender, where care not null gender cannot be unique date of birth not null. It's a date data type city is a rare care can be null can be duplicate. I don't care department ID is an integer admission here is an integer not null. CGPA is a decimal 3 comma 2. Now, here you can see this is a syntax may show you also can you can introduce a check on any particular attribute. So, here what the check keyword is going to do is check keyword is going to ensure whatever conditions comes after the check for that particular attribute which means what is the condition the condition is that the CGPA should be between 0 and 10. Yes, between is inclusive 10.0 that's how 10 will be written total 3 digits maximum value is 2. So, how about this? If you are going to write 100, there is going to be nothing after the decimal maximum number of digits can be 3 and maximum number of decimals after the decimal can be 2. Now, at the end what we have done is we have defined the foreign key and this is the syntax for defining a foreign key. Now, I will even see there are 2 ways to put constraints on any particular. First is to put the constraints along with the attribute for example, primary I just defined that but is it possible for me to do that is the primary if you have combination of multiple items. Will I be able to define the primary key along with the attribute combination of multiple items but if it follows yes or no that is why it is a good practice to define all the constraints and the end. Then we can just illustrate the respect to anybody the identity we can do that with the definition. So, foreign key would have also been defined in the department ID column, department ID number but I have to say something to one of the syntax for any the keyword then in the graph which attribute of this table is a foreign key which is department ID. Then where does that reference to the department stable and the department ID in the department stable and that is it. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes. Similarly, I am going to create the instructor's table. Similarly, I am going to create the courses table here everyone. So, the change that you can actually do is joining here can be an ear data type as well. I would prefer ear data type but then we create the courses table here if you see we have two different foreign IDs in the courses table. You write that is once all the attributes are done one after the other comma separated constraints can be introduced. Any number of constraints can be introduced in a comma separated way just like how we are writing the attributes. The courses created and the last is your course enrollment. So, here in course enrollment also if you see we have two foreign keys and then a third constraint as well which is a unique constraint for student ID and course ID. Now, we are going to understand that this does not include the unique constraint of the ID all on the course rate. They can be multiple students say it is a different ID because it is a different type of course, it is the same course ID because it is a different type of course. What is the combination of the identity code for ID will be the same. So, here we will use the neat constraint of the combination of the identity code. Which means once they can be apart and they don't go into a course only once. Let us run this and all the queries all the tables are created. I will do show tables we can see one two three four five tables are created. If you want to look at the scheme of any table you can do DEC and let us say students. You will get the scheme of the students table which is all the fields they are type whether they are whether they can be null or not. Which keys are there what key constraints are there. And their default value so default value equal to null does not means by default and value will be null. It means that you have not defined any default value. So, if you do not provide a value for that it will be null again that is not possible or cases where the keys are defined to be unique. So, primary unique these keys cannot have null values these cannot be null. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you in the extra you can see it is auto increment as. Now, everyone I will share one more document with all of you please use that document. Who is hard to create? So, hard to 10 CGP will not be stored as 10.00 10 CGP will be stored as 10.0 because the first constraint is the size what is the constraint on the size only three digits can be there. Before and after the decimal combine that is the maximum value of a digit. So, the number of digit will never cross that makes sense. Now, even please open the next document that I have shared with you copy all the insert queries and run them one by one. First insert the data into the department's table. Now, please look at the screen once I will explain the insert of the quality. If you want to see that it is the keyword then the table name and then in the bracket we provide the attribute names in the order in which the values will be provided. You can omit giving the attribute names you can directly give the values but if you directly give the values you have to make sure that the values are present in the order in which the data is present in the table the attributes are present in the table. So, what we are going to do is insert into departments first the department name then the building now here if you see we are not providing department ID as an input. That will be taken care of by the table by the data. So, first so then this bracket closes then values and then in brackets comma separated multiple entries that you want to insert into the database. Light sorry, I am there. Here ya, take now let us run this and see five records are updated five rows are affected which means five entities are inserted into the database. are inserted into the database and is going to show you the department stable once. Oh sorry. See this is the department stable and all the five entries are now created in the stable. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Player to all of you that's great. Now one by one please insert the data into all the tables and then we will start solving the questions one by one. Please do that sequentially it is very important to do that sequentially because of the constraints that we have in place. So you cannot insert the data into the students table until unless the data is present in the department stable. You cannot insert the data into the course enrollment table until unless those entries are present in the course and the student table. So please make sure to do that sequentially otherwise you are going to get an error. It is because of the foreign key constraints that we have put in place. So because the course enrollment table the student ID refers to the student ID in the students table. If the entry will not be present in the students table you will not be able to insert it in the course table. Exactly, come on buddy. Now we have the key to succeed with Git. So basically the idea is I will go ahead and look for some places. Okay. So, you can go and have a look. You, check. Everyone, whenever you are done inserting all of the queries, please just give me a yes in the chat. Okay. Okay. Okay. Have you all inserted all the data into the sequel, everyone? Okay. So, now let's start writing the queries. Now, let's start with the retrieval queries one by one. So, the first query that we are going to talk about is to show all the students that are going to be posting the message in the question in the chat. And then we are going to be writing the query here. Okay. Now, here what we are doing is here we are showing all the records because we are just printing it when we are going to be connecting this database to a system. It is basically going to be retrieving the data from the database. Okay. Now, what is the syntax to get the data from the database, which keyword do we use for that? Absolutely correct. The keyword that we use is select. So, the general syntax for the select keyword is select. Then the attribute names that you want to select. And then the keyword from and then the name of the table. So, let's say what I want to do is I want to get all the attributes. If you want to get all the attributes are you going to give the name of all the attributes one by one? No. What you are going to do is you are going to do select star from and then the table name students. And you will see all the records from the students table being printed here. See, all the 30 records present in the student table you will see here. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes. Now, sometimes when you can see the tables between these 30 and the data, where 80 is right, where 80 is right, where 80 is right. If I want me to look at all the data. Or let's say, let's say I want to just look at the record of the first three students. How am I going to do that? How am I going to make sure that I only get a list of the first three students present in the table? The keyword for that is limit. So, whatever query that you have, whatever beautiful query that you have written, complicated query that you have written. If you only want to get a limited number of outputs, the top x number of outputs. At the end of the query, just add limit and then the number of entries that you want to see. So, if I put limit 5, only the top 5 entries in the table will be shown here. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Please, feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. That's great. Now, time for the next question. Outside. Everyone, can you write the query to show only the student names, cities and the GPS from the student table? Okay. So, what will be the syntax to do that everyone? The same syntax. Select. The only difference will now be, instead of selecting star, selecting all the attributes, we are going to be selecting specific attributes which are given to me. So, what are the attributes that are given to me? Firstly, is the student name. Then, I am given the city and then CGPA from students. And you can see only the student name, city and CGP of the students are being displayed here. Everybody, a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? That's great. Then, the next question, question number three. Can you show me all the unique cities that are coming from? Here, it will be mine, all the names, city, that this group that is coming from. See, again, everyone, as I am saying, this is the only session where we are going ahead with the lab session query by query. Because this is the first time we are writing queries of our own. From the next session, you will get all the questions, all at once. You will get time to solve those questions. And then, at the end, we are going to be discussing all the queries one by one. So, what the question is asking me to do is, the question is asking me to select the cities the students belong to. So, ideally, what I would want to do is select city from students. How many of you think this is what the expected output is? Everybody, how many of you think this is what the expected output is? No, this is not the expected output because the question is also asking you to return all the unique cities. Here, the problem is Delhi is coming four times, Bangalore is coming three times, Mumbai is coming three times. So, the cities are being repeated. How do I make sure to get only the unique cities, cities only once? I will be doing that by using the distinct keyword. So, select distinct city from students. So, in the city, instead of 30 entries, you only have 20 entries which are all the unique cities. Everybody, a thumbs up with the distinct keyword makes sense to all of you present in the session. Yes or no? Which means, can I say that now, the basic state, where you need to be able to get a right from there? If I give you a single table, I ask you to fetch some records from that table. You all will be able to do that. Now, let us put some conditions on to that. So, question number four is to find the students whose CGPA is greater than 8.5. Up until now, what we were doing was, we were just retrieving the data as is present in the table. Or we were just retrieving the first x number of entries for that data from a given table. Now, we do not have to get all the data or the first x entries. Now, we have to get the data based on the condition. And how do you write queries where some conditions are present? You can use print student name in the CGPA, that is fine. Goal is to be able to filter the data based on the condition that is given to you. Yes. Okay. So, now everyone, what I want is, I want to select student name and CGPA from students. But is this what is the only thing that has given to you in the query? No, that is not the only thing that has given to you in the query. In the query, it is given to you that you have to filter those students whose CGPA is greater than 8.5. So, there is a condition. And how do you impose a condition in a SQL query? You impose a condition in a SQL query using a wear clause or a wear keyword. So, after you write what you want to get from which table, you are going to add a keyword wear. And you are going to write the condition after the wear keyword. So, here the condition is CGPA is greater than 8.5. And see, all the entries that you have retrieved are the word, whether CGPA is greater than 8.5. Everybody comes up with this base as all of you mentioned in the session. Yes or no? Yes, very good. So, now what I want, all of you to explore half of the session everyday, good, you have to go to the page to see what are the great base in which the conditions can be. So, here I have written the condition based on greater than, you can have equal to greater than equal to not equal to less than. So, try to practice all of those conditions on to the database that we have. Okay? Print, you will not get money in print. Okay? Super. Now, the next question. Question number 5 is to find the list of students from Delhi. Now, if I am asking you to find the list of students from Delhi, you should print the Z on the city, which can form that we are only printing the students from Delhi. Okay? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, now what is the condition? Select student name city from students where city equal to then. And you can see all the students are retrieved whose name is equal to Delhi. Now, last question on the condition, which is. Can you find all the female students from India? If you give me the list of all the female students from Pakistan. So, now what we have is we have multiple conditions present in this given query. So, what I want is I want to first of all select what? Student name gender and city from students. Where? Student name gender and city from student where? Now, there are two conditions that we have to impose. The two conditions that we have to impose is gender has to be female and city has to be bangla. So, multiple conditions can be clubbed together using the and or the or keyword depending on what is the purpose of the query. So, here what we are going to do is we are going to write where gender equal to female and city equal to Bangla. And see what you got is you got the only female student from Bangla in your college. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if this query is crystal clear to all of you thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Are you in the yes or no? Yes, that's great. Now, now the next question is. To display the students sorted by the CGPA from the highest. Done. So, what will be the query here every one see select student name CGPA from students. Now, what I need to do is I need to arrange that output according to the CGPA in the descending order. And the syntax to sort the keyword to sort is order by now after order by what you have to define is you have to define the column on the basis of you want to order the data. So, let's say I do CGPA and let's try to see. Oh, did we get the list of the students sorted in the descending order? No, we got it in the ascending order. So, you have to understand the default sorting order is the ascending order. If you have to change that after the column name you have to define that you have to want to do that in the descending order the DESC keyword that we discussed. And now the data is present in the descending order. Now, if I ask you another query which is to show the top five students according to the CGPA. How are you going to do that? How are you going to visit the top five students according to the CGPA? Absolutely correct. So, I am going to have the same query. I am not going to change anything in the query everyone. Same query and just going to add limit five at the end and only the top five entries will be displayed. And everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no. Everybody appreciating a little bit more responses here if this makes sense to you or thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Then the second last question for the day. Display the students sorted by the admission here first and then the CGPA from the highest to the lowest. So, all of the students display the students sorted by the admission here first and then in the same admission here in the descending order of the CGPA from highest to lowest. So, I am going to have the same query. So, I am going to have the same query. Cool. So, what will be the query for that again the query will be select. Student name admission here CGPA from the students now because we have to perform the sorting order by and when there are multiple parameters that we know what are the parameters. So, we are also going to provide the parameters in the same way first they are going to be sorted on the basis of their admission here. Now, here everyone do I need to specify that on the basis of the admission here I need the data to be sorted in the ascending order. Now, that is the default nature and then I need to sort them on the basis of their CGPA in the descending order and that is it. So, here you can see first all the students of 2021 batch with their CGPA in the descending order and then all the students of the 22 batch with their CGPA in the descending order. Everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up. First of all, whatever we have discussed today make sure it is all really good. I need to go ahead and say for the homework and see that for the what that group and some questions will be added to your assignment section as well. Again, as I am repeating myself assignments are not graded assignments will be for your practice in the ends and the marks towards the assignment will only be coming from the assignments section in the end time examination. Assignments are only and only for your practice. With that people that is it from my side in.