I did the class, let me also share the screen. This was the previous class, let me reset the canvas. Hello, what did we study in the last class? I think we discussed about data visualization, right? Any questions, any doubts of still what we have studied in the last class? So today we will kind of continue in that direction, learn about more analysis. I think in the last class we did univariate and multi-univariate analysis. Today we will do multi-variate analysis. What is multi-variate analysis? What is multi-variate analysis? I think we discussed this now. Then what is it? How many variables are involved in this? Yes, multi-variate involves greater than two variables. It could be three, four, whatever, but more than two variables. So today we will see how we can kind of represent three variables in our visualization format. What could be one method? One method could be plotting a 3D chart, right? 3D chart would be one way, but 3D charts usually are not that intuitive. 3D charts are not that intuitive. So we will try to find out methods how we can introduce a third variable, a third variable in a 2D chart only. Can anyone think of a method how we can introduce a third variable? Let's say I am plotting, this is my data, ice cream sales. So let's say type of ice cream, temperature and sales. Let's say we can start with magnum or some other brand, Nygendas, Baskin Robbins, let's say these are ice cream bands, right? Temperature, whatever temperatures could be x, y, z, continuous values only, sales values. So let's say if I am trying to plot sales versus temperature, and I am seeing the data like this. Can anyone think how I can include this ice cream variable also in the same chart? Logically, how can I include this ice cream column also in the chart? Any thoughts? How can I include ice cream or a categorical column in this chart? As a from this chart, can I identify which data point belongs to Magnum, which belongs to Baskin Robbins, which belongs to Nygendas? Can I identify? So if somehow I am able to introduce this column into this data, I should be able to do that. So here's what I will do. I will shade the data points based on their ice cream brand. For example, if the ice cream belongs to Magnum, right, then what I can do is I can shade the points in blue color. If the ice cream belongs to Hygendas, maybe I can shade it with a different color. And if it's of Baskin Robbins, then let it be red. And then I will plot a legend here where blue shows blue means Magnum, green means Hygendas and red means Baskin Robbins. So you see, within the same 2D plot, I have introduced a 3D chart, a third color. I can tell that sales of Magnum are higher at higher temperature as compared to other two. Yes or no? Oh, okay. Cool. So is this clear? How we can introduce a third color in a 2D chart? Any doubts, any confusion in this? Cool. So things like this we will do in today's session. We will continue with our dataset of video games. Let me share the notebook with you. So the notebook is shared. We can kind of get started. So we will learn about multivariate data analysis, CCN, CNN, and CNN. CCN means categorical, categorical, numerical. That means two of these variables are categorical, but it's numerical. CNN means one is categorical, two are numericals. And CNN means all three are numerical. Then we will try to learn about three more plots. One is joint plot, one is fair plot, and one is correlation feedback. And one is the plot and agenda for today. First things first, we will import the data using the WGET command. Then I will import all the necessary libraries like pandas, nm, pi, macro, and c1. Then we will load the data using the recse function. And this is our data frame that we were using in the previous classes. It has the name of the game. It has a platform. It has the year it was launched. Who is the publisher and the sales data related to various regions. NSS for North America, EU, Europe, JP, South for Japan. Other means other than these regions and then global sales mean overall sales across the globe. Any questions? I hope everybody remembers this. I think we're just going to go. Cool. So we are going to go ahead with genre, publisher, and platform. For simplicity of the analysis, we will take top three of each. Two mega analysis is here. Basically, I'm taking the top three publishers by count. The count publishers who have the most. Who have produced the most games, top three publishers. Then top three genres. The most. The most. So here I'm going to go value counts. Give me the counts of that particular categorical column. For example, if you want to see data. John, data. John, data. Value counts. This will. And this. Yeah. So you see action accounts, sports, column miscellaneous counts, ones, so forth. And I'm taking only the top three. The top three indexes. Similarly for publisher and platform as well. Then I'm filtering using the lock function and using the isn't operator. This will give me only the top three publishers and top three platforms and. The top three genres. So and ensure that all three conditions are simultaneously true. So all the three conditions have to be simultaneously true to be in a data set. So this is the filter data set. This is what we will be working with today to make an analysis easier. But you want to get there under the whole data. How can I make this. In the index or is there into the correct order right now. This is discontinuous right to 1316. How can I make it continuous. Is there a function that fixes this. Does anybody know we have studied in pandas. No one remembers. Did we study about the reset index. Yes or no. Now you see the index is back in order. Cool. So we'll start with the multivariate data analysis. So we'll try to add a third variable on the top of the plots we have seen so far. Starting with LNC. So we are trying to visualize the correlation between NA and use. So if I want to visualize the correlation between two continuous values. How can I do that which plot should I use. Which plot is used to visualize correlations. Two numerical columns. Anyone. So we studied about scatter plot. scatter plot for the American numerical. And the other method would be that I plot a numerical. And then add a numerical feature on top of. So for the medical. We have seen the box. In the box. We would need to add one more numerical variable. So the question that we come across two questions. Is it possible to add information about the continuous variable. About box plots. So if you look at it, if you look at it. This is how my box plot would look like. Let's say I am plotting NA sales. Against the genre. So action. Shooter. Miscellaneous. If I am plotting the box plots. Let's say this is the box plot for action. This is the box plot for shooter. And this is the box plot for let's say miscellaneous. Now this is one continuous continuous column. And this is categorical column. And this is the third continuous column which is the European sales. How can I add that? Can I even think? Can I even think of how can I add European sales as well? This box represents currently the North American sales. How can I represent European sales as well? Anyone has any thoughts? One way could be to make this a generic column called sales. And add one more box plot which would then represent European sales. For example, the green box represents North American sales for action. The red box could represent. This is known as dodging. You will see dodging. This can be one way. But this is very inconvenient or basically we have a better way to represent the two sales with a categorical variable. Because we also want to visualize correlation. Does this tell me correlation? This does not tell me about correlation. So what I can do is something like this where we will have two continuous starts, continuous variable. And we will color the data points based on the third categorical column. So we will see how we can do that. So first I am creating a figure of figure size, e.g. 0.7. Then I am plotting a scatter problem, see boil, SL does scatter plot. On its axis I am putting with ortho-American sales. On biaxis I am putting the European sales. And then I have put a huge as publisher. So we were supposed to do it with respect to. Okay, this should be genre. Sorry, this should be genre. So you see this is with respect to the genre. And then I am giving a phone size x axis, the phone size is 15 units. And on the y axis the phone size is again 15 units. Then the label of x axis is naysale. So you can see naysale here. The label of the y axis is you sales. So you sales are here. Phone size again given. And then there is a title you versus n a versus you with the per-johner category. So let's look at this chart. What insights can you draw out from this folks? What insights do you think we can draw from this chart? Any thoughts anyone? I hope the chart is clear to everyone, like even at the back. What type of insights can we extract from this? Anyone? We. Sorry. Outliers are there, okay. But about, so what is the question? Question asks us. How can we visualize correlation between n a and e u or but for different genres? What is the question about correlation? What do you think about the correlation between North American sales and European sales for the genre sports? Is it positive? Is it negative? How can you be sure? And how are you able to see North American sales? How are you able to figure out that the sales points belong to sports? Overall there is positive correlation but I am asking only for sports. So which points will you look at? Orange. So if you look at the orange colored points, as the North American sales increases, the European sales are also increasing. If you look at the focus, that is the focus on the orange colored points. So if you notice, as the North American sales are increasing, the orange points are also kind of increasing with respect to the u sales. Same for the blue points or action, right? Action, if you look at the blue points, they are also kind of increasing. Same is for miscellaneous but it is much scattered. I can see a lot of green points here. I can see a lot of green points here. So although there are, there is a positive correlation but it looks like the correlation for miscellaneous is comparatively less as compared to the orange and the blue points. Yes or no? Are you able to see this? So we can kind of say that sports and action, there is a clear correlation between North American sales and European sales. While the same is true for miscellaneous sales, but it is relatively low in magnitude as compared to sports and action. Is that clear? Is that clear? Any confusion is anyone? So yeah, this is basically using scatterplot along with a categorical column. Similarly, you can do it with other categories as well. Like if you want instead of a genre, if you want to look at the top three publishers, you can look at publisher here. You can say publisher here. Now let me just copy this. Paste it here. I'll call it publisher. And wherever genre is written, we can change it to publisher. So the same. Now this looks even clear. If I want to visualize the correlation, look at the green points and even the orange points. The correlation seems very stark. But for the blue ones like the Namco Bandai games, they kind of stop at this point. Beyond this, I hardly see any. But for electronics arts, we can see that the sales are even higher in magnitude. Is that clear? Any questions, any doubts, anyone? It shows that sales for both North America and European sales are higher for electronic arts as compared to Bandai. So this can also be this insight can also be drawn. Is that understood? Any questions, anyone? Cool. So that was around adding a categorical column to a continuous column. Now we'll look at CCN. CCN is basically two categorical columns and one numerical column. The question that we're trying to answer is how will you visualize the global sales for each publisher but separated by genres? So I want to visualize the global sales, which is this column, for each publisher and for each genre separated by genre. For example, I want to find out, let's say activism. Activision is my publisher. What are its global sales for action? What are its global sales for sports? What are its global sales for miscellaneous? Similarly for Namco Bandai. I want to do this. So which, how can I visualize this on a chart on a graph? This is the question that we're trying to answer. Is the problem clear to everyone? If it is clear that any thoughts, how we can do that? So you need to add one numerical variable to two categorical columns. So in the last class, we discussed that we're plotting two categorical columns. Maybe we have categorical categories. We can use a stacked barcode. Here we need to add information about one continuous variable, which is what global sales? Another one could be categorical numerical, which is box plot and we need to add another categorical variable to it. So we will use the concept of dodging, like we kind of keep things side by side and try to plot a box plot. Just as I was explaining here, we'll try to do something similar. Since we don't need to visualize any correlation here, so this plot seems to be the right one. So what I'll try to do is this. I have global sales. I have global sales here. Then I have, let's say, publisher one, publisher two, publisher three. And for each publisher, I have three genres, right? So genre one, genre two, genre three. So I can plot three dodged box plots for each. Red represents genre one. Green represents genre two. Now let's say blue represents genre three. Genre one. Genre one, genre two, genre three. Genre one is represented by red. Genre two by green. And genre three by blue. Similarly, I can do it for publisher two and publisher three. So that's the intuition behind that's how we can kind of plot box plot between two categorical columns and one numerical column. We'll see the code for it now. So first again, creating a figure of figure size 12, 8. Then I'm putting writing the code for box plot using C-Bon. S-L-H-DOT box plot. On X-axis, what am I representing? The publisher, right? Just as you were seeing here, X-axis has publisher. Y-axis will have your global sales. So these are your sales. This is your publisher. And there's a parameter called hue. So hue is the parameter that controls these colors or these numerical, these categorical columns. You see these three different colors that we get? We get it because of the hue column. So hue or the coloring is decided by which category? Genre. The genre decides the colors for the three box plots or how many you have. Then simple, giving the X label with phone size, giving the variable with the phone size. The rotation, again, the phone size for the values on the X-axis, title of the plot and then PLT.Show. So now you see this is how I get a dodged box plot. This is the dodged box plot for genre, publisher, genre and yeah, this should be genre. This should be publisher. This should be publisher. So for each publisher, for each genre, you have their global sales. What insights can you draw from this book? How, like how can it be seen between unquiet activation? What can you say about that? What can you say about unquiet activation? Looking at the chart. Which one has higher global sales? Out of the two, which one has higher global sales? Anyone? So activation has higher global sales because it's box. The boxes are higher. If they correspond to higher values, no? Correspond to higher values. Well, for the Namco, they correspond to basically the lower values. So I can say that activation has higher overall sales across the three genres as compared to Namco. On the other hand, I can also say that between activation and electronic arts, for the miscellaneous genre, activation has higher sales because its green chart is slightly above, or slightly higher than electronic arts. So that's what we can say about the miscellaneous category. So that's how you read the start and compare across the categories. Is that clear? Can you say anyone? Any doubts? Cool, I'll take that as a no. Let's move forward. So in France, I've written it for you to when you'll divide this. Namco has no median sales in every genre as compared to the publishers. Looking at the action genre, even though e and activation have almost similar medians, action is more spread in e. So you can also talk about this spread. Now, once you revise this, you can anyway go through these inferences as well. Any doubts, any questions, anyone? Does that make sense? Cool. So let's look at the third category that we have, which is NNN, or all three being numerical. I say if I have all three numerical columns, what can I, how can I represent them? Any thoughts if all three are numerical? Let's say NA, North American sales, EU sales, and Japan sales. How do you think I can represent them? How do you think? One way could be to plot a 3D scatter plot. One access represents North American sales, one access represents the European sales, and the other access represents the Japanese sales. But that would be again very hard to visualize in a 3D chart and a 2D screen. So we go for a different kind of a chart. It's called the bubble chart. This is basically we use scatter plot only. So we will use sns.scatterplot. On x-axis, I will represent my North American sales. By axiom representing my Japanese sales, and then I'm looking at the RAM column. Third continuous column is RAM column. So there's a parameter called size. This size ensures, this size, as we have out, the size of the scatter bubbles. So basically you see here, these round round bubbles. So the size of these bubbles will be determined by the rank. So let's look at the output. So you see now we have different sized bubbles here. So we have different sized bubbles. Some are large, some are small. And what variable controls that? The rank variable. If the rank is higher, the bubble size is bigger. If the rank is lower, the bubble size is smaller. So one thing we can notice is that as the rank increases, that is the size goes from larger to smaller, like all the bigger bubbles are here, and all the smaller bubbles are here. So as the size of the bubble, the bubbles decrease, the sales are increasing. For the lower ranked games, lower the rank, lower the rank, higher the NA sales, as well as higher the European sales or Japanese sales. Although this is more prominent for North American sales, for Japanese I can still see some larger bubbles, more prominent for North American sales. So what can we say about this, folks? If lower the rank higher than North American sales, what type of correlation is this? Lower the rank, higher the NA sales. What type of correlation is this? Yes, this is negative correlation. Because one is decreasing and the other is increasing. So this is a negative correlation. So that's how you can plot three numerical variables into a single B chart. Any questions, anyone? Any doubts? Yes. Sir, sir. Sir, sir. Sir, sir. Look carefully. From this chart, how can you tell which type of object represents the line? The size of the bubble represents the line. If the size is large, that means the rank is high. See larger bubble corresponds to 15,000 rank. Smaller bubble corresponds to 3,000 rank. That means as the size of the bubble is increasing, the rank is increasing. And now look at the x-axis. The x-axis is not from American sales. Now look at this. Higher value of North American sales are here. Six, eight. North American sales are increasing here. All the smaller size bubbles are here. Very small dots. Look at here. Very small dots. So all the smaller size bubbles correspond to higher North American sales. And all the larger bubbles, large size bubbles correspond to lower North American sales. So that means as the rank is going down, bubble size is decreasing. 15,000, say 3000 North American sales are increasing. So that means lower the rank higher the sales. Is it clear? So that's how we can kind of conclude that there's a negative correlation between North American sales and the rank. Any other questions, anyone? Any other questions, any doubts? Cool. So yeah, inference is also there. Higher the rank, lower the scale of sales or lower the rank higher the sales. Why are they the same thing? While lower ranking names are on higher, higher end of the sales side. Any questions in these three? If not, then we'll move to the next joint plot. Okay. So what is the joint plot? Basically a joint plot draws a plot between two variables. And at the same time, it shows three values, three types of charts. Scatter plot, histogram and KDE, in the all in the same plot. So we'll take North American sales as X coordinate, European sales as Y coordinate. And you can select from different values of parameter. So we'll see, there's a parameter called time and I've said regression for this. We will see what regression means. So for all, you can consider it as a scatter plot only. We will see exactly what a technical what's regression means. But let's look at the code for it. So C-Born SLS dot joint plot on the X axis, I want an A-C-S. My X-L-I want European sales and I want a scatter plot between the two. And there's a data parameter where we pass the data frame. So this is how my joint plot looks like. This is how my joint plot looks like. Within the same chart, I can see scatter plot between two columns. So this is the histogram for which column can anyone tell me which. Out of the two North American sales, which one should this histogram correspond to? Which column should this histogram correspond to? It is two uses because it is adjacent to it. For North American sales, this is the histogram. So this is EU sales, European sales and this is the North American sales. You can also notice that it also shows the KD chart, the kernel density estimation. This curve, this is the KD chart. So at the same time, I'm seeing both univariate analysis with the histogram. And any plot, I like the same time, I'm seeing a bio-variate analysis. So this is the joint plot. So it gives both univariate as well as bio-variate at the same time. Any questions in this, folks? Any questions, anyone? So this is the syntax. If you want to take a look at the syntax. So the syntax is joint plot. x-axis column, y-axis column. But I will see what regression means for now, you can consider data scatter. It may be a scatter, but you can see what maybe you are in regression means. And then the data is top three data, or basically the name of the data frame. So if I do not pass this top three data, if I do not pass this data parameter at all, what will I get? Will I get the output here? If I just run this, will I get the output or will I get a Taylor? Will I get the output yes or no? Can anyone think? So I will not get an output, I'll give an error. How will you understand what any CS means? How will you understand what you CS means? These are just string columns, they are string values. How will you understand what does this even mean? For that you need to pass the data column. So basically you tell the Python, you tell C-born that this is the data frame that I have. And these are the columns I am looking for. So for it to understand that these columns exist, you need to pass the data frame. Is that clear? Any doubts, any confusion, anyone? Cool. So yeah, that's the inference. I think we've already seen when we were doing univariate and bi-variate, it's just written in the combined format. I can also add a hue parameter. So thereby I can also add a third column. So here in the same code I've added a hue parameter and the hue is joner. The hue is joner. And now if you look at it, it has broken the chart into three different categories, which is the action, sports and miscellaneous. Clearly the sales for sports is higher in North America because the chart is ahead. Because this ahead of the other two, so higher sales in North America. Here this tells that this is high frequency. This has relatively low frequency. And similarly you can interpret for the European sales. So just how you interpret the scatter plot, according to you can interpret this also because it's the same only. This is just combining the scatter plot along with the histogram and KD. So you're kind of, we did it here, no? Yeah, so you're combining this with the histogram. Any questions? Cool. It seems like there's a fast or something today again. And you want to leave early? I think I will try to wrap early. I will try to wrap it soon. We have pair plot and then we have correlation matrix and then I think it might. That's all. So you have small three topics left and then one quiz. We should be done soon. We can take a five minute break if you want it's two forty five. Let's come back by two fifty and then we'll close the remaining topics. Is that fine? Those who want to use the extra water can do that. Let's connect and to add to fifty. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. does not give any information. So, when the variables are same, it is technically a univariate analysis only. So, we are kind of plotting a histogram, which is the univariate analysis for rank. Same goes for every other column, your NACL, European sales and every other column. This is also broken down with respect to each genre. You can do with respect to publisher as well. So, that is the pair plot. I can even pull plot a subset of this right by giving only the variables I am interested in. Let us say I am interested only in North American sales, EU sales in Japanese sales. Then I can plot a subset of or a smaller version of this chart as well. Same logic, but just a smaller chart. Similarly, if I want different variables on X and different variable on Y, that is also possible. So, on X axis, I want North American and European sales and on Y axis, I want Japanese sales and global sales. So, that is also possible. Is there any question in this folks? Any doubts? Any questions? Yeah. Cool. If there are no questions, then let us go ahead. Let us look at the correlation matrix. So, basically I can use this core function dot C O double R and this gives me a correlation matrix between every numerical variable against each other. So, correlation of rank with respect to year, rank with respect to North American sales, rank with respect to EU sales and so on so forth. Similarly, for year and every other column, you can notice that the diagonal is one because the correlation between rank and rank would always be the one because both are the same problem. Similarly, year and year is one, EU sales with EU sales is one because they are technically the same column. So, the correlation will always be perfect. So, now we want to plot this table into a chart and C one provides us a chart called heat map. We look into that heat map. So, I just need to write the code SNH or heat map and pass in my correlation matrix. Give a color theme I am giving blues and I want the annotation to be true. That is I want to write the correlation values actually in the chart. So, you see lighter the correlation, this is the bar that tells me the value of correlation. So, lighter the value lower the correlation. So, minus 0.91, so rank and a global sales has a very high negative correlation of minus 0.91. Very strong correlation but in the negative correlation. That means, if rank is increasing sales is global sales is going down or if sales are increasing the rank is going down. Very strong negative correlation and the white color or the lighter shade represents this value. On the other hand, if there is a strong positive correlation, then the color becomes darker and darker. For a one correlation, the color is D blue and as the correlation goes in the positive direction, the color the shades get darker and darker. So, that is how you can visualize the correlation matrix in a heat map format. This chart is known as wheat map. Is that is this clear? Any doubts, any confusions in anyone on this anyone? Any questions? Cool. So, this is the correlation matrix on a heat map. I know it equal to two make sure that the correlation values are written inside the block. So, there are different color maps. You can experiment with different color maps or different themes. If you do cool warm, then the color changes. If you do two lights shifted, then the color will be something else. So, you can play around. So, see the color change. So, different color themes you can play around for the for better visualizations. So, that was majorly all. I have one question. We are analyzing the results of the Olympics and want to find the count of gold, silver and bronze medals one by each country. So, which category does belong to? CCN, NNC, NNN. We want to find the count of gold, silver and bronze medals one by each country. How many variables do you see here by the way? How many variables do you see? Two variables. Okay. Which three variables? Very good. Type of medal. Type of medal is can belong to gold, silver or bronze. Then this count number of medals one of each category and then finally country, whichever country it is. So, this belongs to which category? CCN, categorical, categorical and numerical. So, for plotting the CCN which type of chart did we? Which type of chart can we use? ABCD tell me. Yes, Dodge Barplot. The Dodge Barplot can be the chart here basically out of these. So, I can plot countries on the x axis. Countries can come here. Right. Let us say country one, country two, country three, country four. Then count can come on the y axis and gold, silver and do not have a silver color. Let us choose this silver and then bronze. Right. Each of the three bar can represent each of the medal count. Is that clear? So, this is a Dodge Bar chart. Just the way we did Dodge Boxplot, we can also have a Dodge Bar chart. Is that clear? Boxplot. Boxplot. You can do that see but what does Boxplot tell you? What does Boxplot tell you? Does here be interested in only one number count? How many did we want? But Boxplot tells you five different numbers. Max value, 75 percentile, 50 percentile, 25 percentile and the minimum value. Now, what is the maximum value of the count? What is the minimum? The count is just one number. If let us say they have 100 gold medals. So, how can I break 100 into these five numbers? It is not possible. So, Dodge Barplot is the right choice for it because there is a one fixed value. 100 gold medals. Let us say this is 100. This is 120 silver medals and this is 80 bronze medals. So, it is a fixed value. Nothing that is changing. Is that clear? Any other questions anyone? So, here is a sample on how you can also try to implement this. So, let us say we have four countries, US, China, Japan, Germany and the gold count is this. Silver count for each of this, bronze is this. We are going to create a data frame out of this dictionary. Then once I have this, this is my data frame. Now, to convert it into a for ready for the bar chart and doing a belt. What does melt do by the way? Do you remember what does melt do? So, melt converts white format into long format. I think they have studied this in the past. So, on my x axis or my id variable would be country. Variable name would be medal and the value will be corresponding count. So, this will convert this into this format. USA gold 30, China gold 30, 35. So, for each country what is the gold count? What is the silver count and what is the bronze count? And then we can simply pass this directly into the SNSZ bar chart function. And it will automatically create the huge the dodged bar chart. So, USA medals, China, medals, Japan's medals along with the shade. Any doubts, any questions in this code anyone? Any questions in this code? We converted this into melt format in this long format because bar plot the function the C points bar plot functions expects a long form a long form dataset. So, we had to convert white format into a long form using the melt. So, we will convert this into this long form because the bar plot by default expects this type of data frame. Is that clear? Any questions, any doubts? Yeah. Any question? Cool. Okay, so that was all for today's class. I do have assignments. I will unlock them. I also have some extra questions here. According challenge and assignment questions, some of your assignment questions. So, sorry. Which are not open? You can't see them. When you click at this, you don't see this website. TGAL checked in the backend. You should have access but TGAL checked in the backend how does that happens. But TGAL, anyways, I have unlocked the assignment. Those, you know, if you want to say it, you can try it out but if you want to end up at end of your face, that's also fine. Cool. So, that was, I think, mostly all for today's class. Now, I would need someone to