you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you get I It was all the activities that were happening on the food delivery platform. So whenever there will be a need to design the schema for any application, the first thing that we will figure out is what are all the activities or the actions that will happen on the platform. Now based on each and every one of these activities, what we then understood was what information would the company want to store for each of these activities. And that is what will help us understand what is actually the information that needs to be stored in the databases. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this part was also clear to all of you? That's great. Just one second. Okay. Now, post that what we did was. We understand what business objects are meaning. All the important things inside a business are called as business objects. And then what we did was we categorized all of the information that we or all of the important things that we need to store on the basis of these business objects. So what are the attributes that will go for each and every one of these business objects. We did a proper segregation of those attributes. And that is what the next step in schema design is. So what are the attributes that we need to do? Okay. This is one of the most important points to remember, which is the information is segregated on the basis of the ownership and the responsibility. Okay. Now, then we discussed what entity and entity sets are. Entity is basically any distinguishable real world object about which the information is being stored. It can be real, virtual or conceptual as well. Okay. Now, entity set is when we put all of those entities together into what in relational databases we call as a table. Did we talked about what the strong and weak entity is? What are what is an attribute and what are the different types of attributes that we have? Right? Simple, composite, single, multi-valued, derived attributes. Then we talked about keys where we primarily discussed what are super keys, what are candidate keys. And then a little bit on the concept of the primary key, the foreign key as well. Okay. Now, what are we going to discuss in today's session? This project of quality is very poor, right? The subcook of the cry, right? Everybody is able to see this is not up to the mark, right? Right. Rightness have tried to increase, but if I increase the brightness too much then the quality reduced. So for there, you can see right, it's not just the brightness. Now. So in today's session what we will talk about is, as we all know that the relational database that we're talking about, my sequel is primarily relational database. So up until now we've talked about entities, but we haven't discussed a lot about the relationships. We have done a very small discussion about the relationships when we were writing the sequel queries, but today we're going to start with that discussion about relationship between entities. We're going to talk about the different types of relations, meaning one to one, one to many, many to one. Then post that we're also going to talk about what junction tables are, okay? Or the cardinality of a relationship again and we're going to end that section by discussing many to many in junction tables. Okay. Once we are done with the relationships and cardinality, right? We're going to move on to one of the most important topics in schema design which is called as normalization. Anybody here already aware of what normalization is a concept is? Have you heard this word normalization ever before? What in the case of schema as well maybe somewhere else as well? Where? Previous? Previous term, what was the concept of normalization? Making length one, huh? But that is not what this normalization will be, yes? Who be he? He can be length to be, huh? One of them. Okay. But this is a different normalization. Sorry? Sorry? That's not true. Yes. That is also where you've heard it. Again, different normalization, okay? So this is not the mathematical normalization that we've discussed. In this normalization, we will actually have some certain rules defined for schemas, some certain rules defined for good schemas. Where in today's session, we will also see how you can actually mathematically identify your composite keys and your, sorry, your candidate keys from the set of attribute present in the table. What functional dependency is actually means? So if you remember, there was one discussion that we've had at the time when we were writing group by clause, right? And in the group by clause, what we saw was that even though we are doing a group by clause on the basis of the department ID or the employee ID, but we were still able to write the employee name in the select clause, right? Even though the employee name was not a part of your group by clause, we were able to write that because it was functionally dependent on the employee ID. So today we're going to talk about what functional dependency means as well and what normalization to a database means. So basically in the end, what our goal will be to have a final structured schema present for this food delivery platform, which will lay the foundation for the next lecture where the next lecture will entirely be a business case study, where we will take the example of a complete hospital management system. We will bring the requirements, we will discuss the requirements in the session and then we will one by one go through all the concepts that we've discussed and create a final schema for that management system. So firstly, first of all, thumbs up if the agenda of the lecture today makes sense to all of you. Okay. So now let's talk about the first concept, which is relationships. So what are relationships? Relationships comes into the picture when here what we've done is we have defined different types of entities in our tables. We have defined different types of attributes in our tables. We have different in this database for each and every table, each and every entity. What we've also defined is we've defined what are the different types of keys that are present in tables. But are all entities acting independently in a system? For example, in the food delivery platform, are customers working alone? Are customers not related to any of the other entities present in the system in the database every when they yes or no? The order related? They are related. How? Customers place the order. So there is a relationship between the customer and the order entity. The restaurant receives the order. So again, there is a relationship between the restaurant and the orders. Delivery partner delivers the order. Again, the relationship between the delivery partner and the order. Right? These are happening for a particular order. So there is a relationship between payments and orders entities as well. Right? So let's define relationship formally. What is a relationship? A relationship represents an association between two or more entities. In simpler words, relationship talks about how two business objects are connected or related to each other. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Couple of examples of relationship present in our food delivery platform are customer and order. Okay? Again, can I say that one customer can place multiple orders on the platform yes or no? Yes? Can one order be placed by multiple customers? One individual order can that individual order be placed by multiple customer and not talking about one item and talking about one order can that be placed by multiple customers no that will only be placed by one individual customer. Then another relationship that we might have is between the restaurant and the menu items. Okay? Now if I say that one restaurant is there can I say each restaurant is definitely going to have multiple menu items right but for one record that is present in the menu items table it will belong uniquely to only one restaurant. Can everybody give me a yes or that makes sense to all of you? Yes. What else? We also have delivery partner and orders right? So here as well I can say that one delivery partner can deliver multiple orders but when I look at an individual order one order can only be delivered by one delivery partner. So here one important observation that we have seen here is that each and every relation that we have between different entities behaves differently based on how the interactions are designed in the system right and what are the different types of interactions designed in the system? One to one, one to many and many to many. So these are the three different types of relation one to many sometimes also called as many to one again we have already seen all three of these but we are going to quickly again scheme through all three of these. So let's start with the first one which is one to one relationship. Now what is a one to one relationship? A one to one relationship is when one entity is associated or one entity instance is associated with only in the sense of another entity. I will give you an example to better understand this. In our system if we talk about the relationship between an order and the payment can I say that every again listen to me carefully can I say that each order will have exactly one payment and each payment will belong uniquely to one order and everybody give me a thumbs up first of all if one to one relationship makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes. Now generally how a one to one relationships stored in the databases? Generally how will you want to relate the payment and the orders together? What will be our approach anybody can explain? How will you make sure that this relationship exists? Anybody sorry? For any. For any. Absolutely correct. So what we have is we have two different tables in our system one is the orders table, one is the payments table right here you are going to have an order id to uniquely identify the order here you are going to have a payment id to uniquely identify the payment. What you are just going to do is you are going to put the payment id here in the order stable as a foreign key which refers to the payment id in the payments table to make sure that now there is a relationship that is present. And everybody give me a thumbs up if generally how one to one relationships are stored in the databases makes sense to all of you present in the session in the form of foreign keys right? Super. Okay. Then the second one is one to many relationships. Now what are one to many relationships? One to many relationships are where one entity or one entity instance is associated with multiple instances of another entity. For example let me explain with the help of an example. If I talk about the relationship between the restaurant and its menu items right here tell me can I say that one restaurant is going to have multiple items present in its menu but one menu item will be present only in one restaurant right. So what type of relationship this is? This is a one to many relationship. Now here in a one to many relationship you have to have one part in the many part okay. One entity is going to be the one part the other entity is going to be the many part. In this particular case if you see that is one restaurant can have many many items and that is how the one to many relationship is defined. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if one to many or the second type of relationship also makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Can all of you please give me a thumbs up in the chat if this is clear to all of you? That is great. Let us look at one more example which is our customers to orders. One customer can place multiple orders but one order can only be placed by one customer. So it will be a one to many relationship one customer many orders. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Yes. One to many are the most common type of relationships that you will see in real world systems. One to one is basically a constraint generally you will very like one to one you will see very less frequently one to many you will see very frequently present in database systems generally most common type of relationships that we are going to see is going to be one to many again how do I store one to many relationships? How do I store one to many relationships in the database? Can I store a list of all the orders for the customer in the customer's table? Should we order the orders for a customer in the customer's table? Should we create an array as an attribute and keep adding the order IDs in that? So what is the correct design for handling one to many relationship? In the many table for each record of the many table we are simply going to add the primary key of the one table as a foreign key right which is going to make sure you are able to see which unique customer has placed this order. When everybody gives me a thumbs up with this makes sense to all of you present in the session or thumbs down there is anything that does not make sense to anybody. So both of these one to many relationships are very easy to create and store we just have to add a foreign key in the table right in one yes. So in the restaurant in the menu items example right here as well in the menu items what you are going to do is you simply just going to add the restaurant ID to identify which restaurant this menu item belongs to and this is how any relationship will be present. One restaurant ID will be present in multiple menu items make sense? So pizza for dominoes will be different than pizza for pizza hut right because again what are the attributes that can be different the price can be different toppings there are a lot of things that can be different right so even though the names will be same what you want to say is that the item name might be same no we are not going to have same entry being used in multiple restaurant not a good design because restaurants would want autonomy to be able to modify their menu items separately right because super now comes the third and the most important relationship type which is called as many to many or m is to n what is many to many of you again many to many is multiple instances of one entity can be associated with multiple instances of another entity sure late now can anybody give me any example of many to many relationship in our food delivery platform could you like to try cute table you are the conconceived I think you know the conge table knows the time many to many. Anybody could you like to try to give an example for many to many relationship customers and restaurants are not related right order and restaurants are related right order and customers are related to orders from two different restaurants items and restaurants very good users. Oh our database. Custom items everything again see what you think is your jumping relationships. You have to think about what are the entities that are actually directly related with each other when you say customer and item customer directly does not place item a customer is not directly related to item customers related to an order order is related to item. So, the correct example for the many to many relationship here will be orders and many items. How can one order contain multiple items from the menu can one order contain multiple menu items yes and can one menu item be a part of multiple orders yes this is how it is many to many relationships can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no yes now comes the important question which is you have your order table here you have your menu items table here how do you store this many to many relationship if for an order I want to add the primary key of all menu items again that you come a list in the orders table is that the good way to store any attribute composite attributes or multi valued attributes should we have multi valued attributes present in the system. No he again if I want to store one particular menu item has been ordered in how many orders should for each menu item I create a list of order IDs is that a good design no that is not a good design. So, how do you store this many to many relationship is by creating another table which is called as your junction table in which I create a table with the name of order items where from the order stable I take the order ID and from the menu items table I take the item ID and this combination is what becomes a primary key or a candidate key for the order stable where this will also be a foreign key and this will also be a foreign key. Everybody present in the session can give me a thumbs up if the concept of a junction table makes sense to all of you present in the session please feel free to give me a thumbs down this does not make sense to anybody. Now, everyone whenever we have a relationship how many entities from each side can participate in that relationship is formally what is called as the cardinality of the relationship. Now, what I am doing is I am just giving a formal word to whatever we have just discussed. So, cardinality specifies the number of entity instances that can participate in a relationship. Meaning, if I go back to any of the examples that we have if I go back to the one to one relationship between order and payment one order has exactly one payment and one belongs to only one order. So, in one relationship only one order and one payment can participate it becomes a one to one relationship and the cardinality is one to one. Cardinality is not a new concept it is just a name to the relationship that we have just defined. Second is one to many cardinality which is again restaurant menu order. Restaurant one is participating menu items multiple are participating to create an order. What is the cardinality of this relationship one to many? The last one is many to many again. So, same way orders and menu items this becomes many to many cardinality. So, cardinality is basically just a name given to the concept that we just discussed. Everybody can you give me a thumbs up if what is cardinality also big sense to all of you present in the session. Please give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Okay. Now, I have given there is one more small concept in cardinality itself which is called as participation constraint. What is participation constraint? So, cardinality defines how many elements from or how many entity instance from each entity set in a relationship are going to be or can participate in a relationship. Participation constraint talks about whether it is mandatory for each entity to participate in that relationship or not. For example, if let's say I talk about the order and the menu items table. Okay. If I talk about this many to many relationship. In this many to many relationship everyone tell me is it mandatory for every menu item to be a part of some order. Is there a requirement that if a restaurant has listed an item on its menu it has to be a part of an order? No, why people? No, there is no requirement. So, it is mandatory for all the participants to participate in that. So, this is basically called as voluntary participation where the participation is not mandatory or it is called as partial participation where the participation is not mandatory. Second is total participation where every entity must participate in a relationship for example your order and payment. Can an order be completed without a payment? Can a payment be present without an order? No. So, each and every entity here must participate in this relationship and that is why this is called as a total participation. Participation does not talk about the cardinality of the relationship. Participation talks about whether it is mandatory for each entity instance to participate in the relationship or not. For example, if you talk about the relationship between the orders and the customers. Can an order exist without a customer? No. So, can I say there also I am demanding a total participation from the customers in the relationship, from the orders in the relationship. Every order must have a customer associated with it. Every order must participate in the customer relationship. Similarly, another example for a partial participation will be delivery partner and orders. Meaning each order should have a delivery partner meaning order is having a total participation in the relationship. But do each delivery partner mandatory need to perform a delivery? Can there be a case where a delivery partner joined the platform but eventually never ended up delivering an item? It is possible right? So, that is called as partial participation. Some delivery partners might have deliveries or orders that they have delivered. Some might not have deliveries or orders that they have delivered. Everybody thumbs up if cardinality and participation is crystal clear to all of you. Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. That is creative. Now, whatever you have discussed in today's session right, when we eventually have to create a schema out of it. One way to create a schema is write down all the tables on a paper and pen together. So, basically one by one list down all the tables and then create a list of all the relationships at the end. Define the cardinality of the relationship. But that is not very pleasing to look at. So, then what we do is we simply represent a database in the form of a diagram. And that diagram is what is called as ER diagram entity relationship diagram. So, what are entity relationship diagram? Entity relationship diagram or diagrams that can help us simplify complicated database. Where you might have 50, 60 tables present multiple hundreds of relationship present multiple business rules are present. In that case writing everything textually in the form of table by table by table by table and writing all the relationships at the end might not make it very intuitive. A diagram will make everything feel intuitive and clear to understand. And that is why generally when we talk about the schemas we talk about the ER diagrams of those schemas. Now, what is an ER diagram? An entity relationship diagram is a visual representation of entities attributes and the relationships inside a database system. Meaning what should be present in the ER diagram? In the ER diagram we have all the entities present, all the attributes of those entities present along with the proper constraints mentioned. You do not have to write all of the constraints there. You are not describing a table. If you want you can add all of the constraints that is a good idea that is a good practice. And then we have relationships present in the tables. Everybody present in the session first the fall game you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you. Thank you. Take care. Now, how are we going to draw these ER diagrams or how does these ER diagrams individually look like? Let's talk about that as well quickly. So for each and every thing that is mentioned here, there is a specific figure that is used to draw those in a visual representation. So what I will do is explain it one by one. Let me just open. Let me just open it. 43 questions. So, this is again just one of the possible applications where you can actually go and draw an ER diagram. You can use any one of these applications to draw the ER diagram. Right now, I'm just using this to visually represent it, which application should you prefer should you use? I'll talk about that in the next session when we are going to create a schema. Today, we're just going to talk about each and every individual thing properly. So, first of all, everyone, first of all, let's talk about entities. So, how are entities represented? And entities are generally represented in the form of rectangles. This is how entities will be represented. Can everybody first of all give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? Yes. Now, again, you can make it fancy. You can draw lines in it. You can store attributes, right attributes however you want. But very simply, if I just do it in a simple way, it'll just look like this. This is my. Customers table or let's say orders table or any specific tables. Now, whether you want to write the name of this on top of it or just inside it on the top that is totally up to you. Now, how are attributes stored? So, attributes are usually drawn as ovals connected to the entities. So, what I have here is I have this customer's table. What will be the attributes here? Customer ID. Customer name. And these are connected like this with the main table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if how a table is represented in the near diagram makes sense to all of you present in this session? Can all of you please give me a thumbs up if there's anything that does not make sense to anybody present in the lecture here? Okay. Now, again, everyone, this is not the only way that we do this. Generally, when you will be drawing the near diagram, this is how you will draw the near diagrams. What do I do with this? This is going to be one second of you, all right? So, the only difference is here if you can see that each and every attribute what I've done is I have not listed down each and every attribute as a separate oval from the rectangle in which the table was or the entity was being represented. Here, what I've done is I've listed on all the attributes just below the table name inside that entity itself. Why the reason being this is a much cleaner way to design this looks much cleaner as compared to this. This looks very poor to look at and this will become very clustered when you will have multiple attributes present within one entity and everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you presenting this session, how diagram is drawn. So, basically here, all I'm saying is just have a look at this diagram. Just have a look at this diagram, everyone. Better? So, here if you all can see, this is how the entity relationship diagram is going to look like. This is the kind of diagram that we will be drawing and this is the kind of diagram that you will have to draw in the assignment that you will get as a part of this schema design module, what you can see is these rectangles represent entities inside the entities what I have is I have all of the attributes mentioned along with the constraints of the attribute meaning which means the primary key and these lines represent the relationships. Here you can see this symbol represents a many relationship, this symbol represents a one relationship. So, this is the one to many relationship which I have mentioned here, customer, the name of the relationship is places, order, where what you have is participation by customer is one, order is many, hence what I have is one to many relationship, one to many relationship. Here you can see here only I only have one to one relationship so both of them have this type of line drawn here. Everybody present in the session if what is an entity relationship diagram is crystal clear to all of you, please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the lecture here. Again right now we have not drawn the diagram ourselves, you just looked at what the diagram looks like, what is it that we will eventually draw for the database that we are designing. People can all of you give me a thumbs up in the chat if this makes sense to all of you. Super that is great. So, now I am really what is an entity relationship diagram is clear to all of you right. Let us move on to the next section of the class, where what I am going to be doing is I am going to be talking about what normalization is a concept is. But before we dive deep into the concept of normalization let us first try to identify what are the issues that we might have if a database does not follow the normalization principles. Okay. So, what I am going to be doing is firstly I am just going to talk about what would happen if a idiot designs a database. So, if an idiot designs a database and I ask them to store all the details of an order, how is it that they are going to store the details of an order? This is how they are going to store the details of an order. Let us ask someone who has no idea about what databases are, who has no idea about how back end system works, who has no idea about anything tech related at all. I just ask them to design what information needs to be stored for this system. And all they could think of or come up with was eventually it is a food delivery platform, the goal is to order an item. So, this is what I need to store and this is all of the data. What are the data? Order ID, order date, customer ID, customer name, customer phone, customer city, restaurant ID, restaurant name, restaurant phone, restaurant city, delivery button, ID name phone, menu item, ID, name, price quantity, payment ID, method and payment status, coupon code, coupon discount percentage. All of this stored in one single table. Question that I have for all of you present in this session is, does this looks good? Does this looks good? No, this does not looks good. Why does this not looks good? Anybody, why does this not looks good? Hand writing is not good. Spelling mistake is there. Gaps are there. What is it that makes this looks not good? Relations. Relations. Very crowded. There can be tables where you might have to store hundreds of attributes. So, Karab, what are you going to do? Sorry? We have to make it more simpler. But how do we know that this is not simpler? For this particular table we are able to understand it because we understand the food delivery system very, very properly. We understand that order is one entity, restaurant is one entity, delivery partner, menu, payment, all of these are individual business objects. They should be stored in different tables. But do we have a formal approach method or a mathematical formula to verify whether a schema is good or not? Yes or no? Do we have a mathematical formula to validate whether a schema is good or not? Or a mathematical approach to validate whether a schema is good or not? Actually, we do have. And that is what we are going to talk about in this section. Again, there is no formula that we are going to write. You have to understand that there is not going to be a specific formula. But there is a very structured way to look at a schema. See if it is good or not. And again, step by step optimize the schema as well to make it better to enhance it in a way that issues does not exist in that schema. But here the first step is to identify what issues are going to be there in this design. Okay. So let us say in this design what I do is let us say if I am just storing a list of all the orders placed by the SSD students of your batch. And let us say I have five black entries in this order. Okay. Or let us say if you talk about the real world situation as well. Let us say we are talking about Swiggy. Swiggy has approximately five to six crore customers, right? Each customer, five to six crore active customers. Each customer places order on an average of one order per week. Okay. Now, number of restaurants will also be in lakhs. Number of items will be in millions or billions I guess, right? So will this design survive that scale? Will that design survive that scale? Let us say Rahul as a customer places 50 orders. What is in this design which is not good? There will be too many repetitions meaning Rahul's name and number will be present across 50 entries in this table. Can everybody give me a yes if this makes sense to all of you present in this session? Yes, that is great. Right? Suppose one particular restaurant, for example, let us say Domino's receives 10 lakhs orders in total. Again, what is going to happen? Domino's name, phone number and the city is going to be stored 10 lakh times in the system. Right? 10 lakh times in one table, you are repeating a string which is not required to be present in that table in the first place. So data redundancy is one of the biggest challenges that I can see in this particular system which is what normalization solves for. But before we try to solve data redundancy, let us try to understand what are the problems that data redundancy might create. Right? So there are three different anomalies that are very common across a bad schema design, a bad database design. Okay? And what are those three common anomalies present? The first one is an update anomaly. What is an update anomaly, everyone? Update anomaly happens when a single logical update requires changes in multiple roles. Meaning, here in the design that we have, we don't have a specific restaurant table. Right? All I have is I have the restaurant details present within the order details table. Now the problem here is if I have to make a change to any detail about the restaurant. For example, if I have to change the number for pizza hub, I will have to make that update in 10 lakh entries. Could this have been avoided with a better database, design everyone? Yes or no? Yes, this could have been avoided with a better database design. Second is insertion anomaly. What is insertion anomaly? So now if this is the only table that you have, can a restaurant now even exist in the system without an order? Can you ever have a restaurant present in a system without an order? Can you have a customer present in a system without an order? Can you have a delivery part that present in the system without an order? No, right? Which creates insertion anomaly? What is insertion anomaly? Insertion anomaly talks about case where certain information cannot be inserted without inserting unrelated data. So customers and orders are not relative data. They are different categorized data who are related by a relation in between them. Customers data is separate, customer attributes are separate, order attributes are separate. They are just related by a simple one to many relationships. Now insertion in a customer should not need any sort of order data. But if we are using a bad database design then we are going to get insertion anomaly as well. And even the last one is deletion anomaly. What is deletion anomaly? Deletion anomaly talks about deleting one piece of information, accidentally removing other important information as well. For example, let's say there is a restaurant with the name of BFC. Now in VFC there is only one order that is present and then I will have an entry for BFC present in this database. But for some reason that order got cancelled and I want to remove that order from the table. The moment I remove that order from the table can I say BFC as a restaurant also will completely be removed from my platform. I will have no record of BFC present. Or let's say one day I have an order from BFC or I have 10 orders from BFC as a restaurant. What I want is I want to delete BFC from the platform. I found them doing some malpractice in the restaurant. Chicken, chicken, not chicken. Not chicken, not chicken, not chicken, not chicken, kabab, chicken, kabab. Again very bad joke but I love these kind of jokes. So coming back to this, if for any reason you remove all the records that belongs to the restaurant BFC and then an investigation happens. Someone ordered chicken, it was not chicken, they come to you with a complaint about that order ID but you have removed BFC and along with BFC all of those orders have also been removed which was not required. All you wanted was to blacklist BFC from your platform but still had to make sure you kept those order details with you. Which is again going to create a deletion in normal. Deletion in one piece of information is leading to unnecessary information being deleted from the data base. And why are all of these issues coming only and only because of one reason which is data redundancy? Which is what we have to learn how to avoid and that is where normalization comes into the picture. What is the concept of normalization everyone? Normalization is the process of organizing data to remove or reduce redundancy and eliminate the anomalies that we have just discussed. The whole and sole purpose of normalization is you have to understand to organize the data. Normalization will not change the data that we are storing. Normalization will not tell you what data you need to store. That is something that we have already figured out in the last lecture and part of today's lecture. Normalization will only talk about how we are going to arrange that data properly across multiple tables in multiple entities and what kind of relationships will present between those entities. Can everybody give me a thumbs up first to follow the meaning of normalization makes sense to all of you present in the session. In simple word normalization helps us to break bigger table into smaller tables, reduce duplication present in the database, improve the consistency across the data and create cleaner schemas. Now normalization also does not happen randomly. We do not do normalization on the basis of our intuition. Normalization has a very structured mathematical approach to it. To understand the structured approach for normalization we are going to talk about a couple of concepts. First one being functional dependency. So, in this section what we are going to talk about is what are functional dependencies and why functional dependencies are central to normalization. So, what is a functional dependency? Let us try to understand with the help of a real example here. Let us say what I have is I have the customer stable in my database. Or let us say we do not even have our customer stable. Let us just talk about a attribute which is customer ID. And let us say I am talking about customer ID 101. My question to all of you is by using this customer ID 101, is it possible for me to find out the name of the customer? Yes, is it possible for me to find out the city that the customer is present in? Yes, is it possible for me to find out the phone number of the customer? Yes. Meaning customer ID as an attribute uniquely identifies a customer. Therefore, your customer name is a customer ID. Customer name depends on the customer ID, customer phone number depends on the customer ID and customer city also depends on the customer ID and this is what is called as a functional dependency. What is the formal definition of a functional dependency? A functional dependency X determines why exist if X uniquely determines why. Meaning, if you know the value of X, you can find out what the value of Y will be. For example, here if I know the value of customer ID, I can easily find out what customer name will be, what customer phone will be, what customer city will be. Meaning customer name, phone and city are dependent, functionally dependent on customer ID. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if the meaning of functional dependency is clear to all of you? Please give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. Super. Now, here X becomes your determinant because X is used to determine the value of Y and Y is called as your dependent attribute. Now, there are multiple different functional dependencies that are present in the database that we discussed in the last session. Meaning, restaurant ID will define restaurant name, restaurant city, right? Cousins. So, let me just list down a couple of dependencies here, couple of examples of these dependencies. Customer ID can determine the customer name, customer phone, customer city, right? Your restaurant ID can determine the restaurant name, restaurant, phone number, restaurant city, right? Your menu item ID can determine the menu item name and item price, right? Delivery partner ID can determine the delivery partner name and delivery partner phone number. And similarly, let's say if you have a coupon code, right? Your coupon code as an attribute can determine the percentage of discount that will be applied on using this coupon code. Everybody can you give me a thumbs up with the example of a couple of these dependencies, make sense to all of your thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the lecture. Okay. Now, these functional dependencies are core to normalization because these functional dependencies will help us understand how information naturally groups together. So, functional dependencies are what will help us understand how different attributes will be grouped together. For example, in this particular table everyone, if I know that the restaurant ID is a determinant for the restaurant name, phone and city. The restaurant name, phone and city are functional dependent on the restaurant ID. They can be fetched easily from the restaurant ID. We're not going to repeat this information 50 Lakh times or 10 Lakh times for pizza hut. What we're simply going to do is we're going to put all of this in the table and we're going to use the determinant which is the restaurant ID to represent a restaurant entity in this order details table. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Functionally dependent attributes are what we are supposed to remove. Right? Okay. Now, there are two types of functional dependencies that we have. Again, every one see today's session is going to be a little bit technical but you need to remember each and everything is not required for you to remember as a part of our discussion. There are some things that you can easily forget as well and which is completely okay. There are some definitions that you're going to forget and that is completely finally not going to be using them as well. But when we're discussing the topic, it is very important for us to understand each and everything properly. Right? So that if any of these are required for a discussion anywhere in the future, you are aware of these concepts that is what is most important. So what is a trivial functional dependency? A trivial functional dependency is where dependent attribute is already a part of determinant. For example, if I try to write a functional dependency like this, it's a very important thing. Customer ID and customer name determines customer name. Now here, the functionally dependent attribute is already a part of your determinant. Right? This type of dependency is what is called as a trivial dependency. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes or no? Meaning it is of no value, little value to us. It is of no significance to us. This type of dependencies are not something that we're going to use and you have to understand that very very carefully. What we need to focus on is non-trivial functional dependencies. What are non-trivial functional dependencies? A dependency where the dependent attribute is not a part of the determinant. Determinant will uniquely determine or help us identify those dependent attributes. For example, if I say customer ID can uniquely determine customer phone, here you can see the dependent attribute is not present in your determinant. Your determinant is what we're going to be using to find out the value of the dependent attribute or as a representation of the dependent attribute across multiple tables. Can everybody give me a yes, what is a non-trivial functional dependencies makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes, so let me just down the set of all the functional dependencies that we might be using in this system. This is just a very small list. This is not an exhaustive list completely right now, which is your order ID can give you the order date. Customer ID can give you the customer name, phone, city, restaurant ID can give you the restaurant name, four city delivery partner ID can give you this many items can give you this blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah. These are all of the possible functional dependencies that we have in the system. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Okay, now I have an important question that I would like to ask all of you. Let me launch a quiz for that. So, in the menu items table can the menu item name determine the item price? Okay, so here in the menu items table right, if we talk about the menu item table, here menu item ID can uniquely identify a name menu item ID can uniquely identify the price but when I talk about menu item name right, Tandurichika pizza can be present in Domino's it can be present in Mojo Pizza, it can be present in Awan's story can be present across multiple restaurants with the same name. So, name is not a determinant or name is not a correct attribute to be used as a determinant. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session? Please give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. So, functional dependencies are also defined by your business logic. In your business logic it is present that multiple restaurants can have an item present with the same name and hence functional dependencies cannot be defined on the basis of the item name. Right, now we also have a case of composite dependencies. So, just like how we had a case of composite primary keys, we also have a case of composite dependencies. What is a composite dependency everywhere? A composite dependencies where you have a combination of multiple attributes being used as a determinant. For example, if I talk about my order item stable, what was present in my order item stable? In my order item stable, I had the order ID present. I had the menu item ID present. I had the quantity of that item ordered in that order present. Quantity of that item ordered in that order present. Now, here if I talk about it, first of all tell me everyone is order ID alone, sufficient to determine the quantity of any particular item. Is the menu item ID alone sufficient to determine the quantity of an item in an order? So, here if I want to determine the quantity of an item in an order, what I would need in this case is I would need both the order ID and the menu item ID to be able to determine the quantity which means here the determinant is basically a combination of multiple attributes which is called as a composite dependency. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. That is great. Which brings us to the next topic which is called as attribute closer. So, the question that we primarily need to answer in this particular section is to be able to understand that if I have a very large database in which I have very big tables present. How do we mathematically identify the candidate keys properly? First of all, can everybody give me a thumbs up if you all remember what a candidate key is? Please give me a thumbs down if you don't remember what a candidate key is. So, let me recall that very quickly. Super key is the set of attributes that can be used to uniquely identify a record in a table. Candidate key is a minimal super key set meaning the minimum attributes that are required to uniquely identify a record in an entity set or a table. Everybody a thumbs up if what is a candidate key makes sense to all of you present in the session? Yes. Now, how do I identify which attributes can uniquely help me identify the records in a table correctly? That is what we are going to be talking about in this particular section. For example, everyone let's say what I have is I have the order details table present here. Okay. In the order details table what I have is I have the order ID, the order date, customer ID, customer name, customer phone, restaurant ID, restaurant name, many item ID, many item name and quantity. In this particular case can you tell me which attribute can uniquely identify all the order details or which attribute can help me uniquely identify a record in this particular table? Order ID. Order ID. All of you are absolutely correct. For this particular table just by looking at the table what I can see is that order ID is what will be a unique ID for each and every order that I am going to place and that will help me identify a record in this particular table uniquely. And that is basically what is called as the concept of attribute closure. Attribute closure is the concept of mathematically or systematically I verify mathematically what is the set of attributes that will be required to uniquely identify a record in any particular table. And how we do that is simply by using the concept of functional dependencies. We first write down the definition of attribute closure. So, the closure of an attribute say X is the set of all the attributes that can functionally, that can be functionally determined from X. Let me explain this slowly everyone. It is a little hard to digest. Okay. Attribute closure talks about if you know the value of an attribute X, what attributes can be determined using that X? The set of all those possible attributes is what is called as an attribute closure. Can every thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no? Please feel free to give me a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Great. So, generally what are the type of questions I have asked in attribute closure? Generally, the type of questions asked in the attribute for you I am copying from a markdown file that is why it is a little bit of changes that I have to make here. Don't worry I will share that markdown file with you as well for notes reference. So, here generally in case of attribute closure what will be given to use you will be given functional dependencies. Now, using those functional dependencies what you will have to do is you will have to identify the closure set of any particular attribute. Now, here what I can see is that customer ID as an attribute can be used to determine the customer name the customer phone and the customer city. So, how we write this formally is customer ID plus is equal to and in the bracket I am going to put customer ID customer name customer phone and customer city. Okay. The important notation that we need to note here is this x plus this x plus is what defines the closure of x. And the closure of x basically contains the set of all the possible attributes that can be determined with the help of this x. Everybody present in the session a thumbs up with the concept of attribute closure makes sense to all of you comes down if it is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Okay. So, now let us see what I have is. I will give you a small example to work on this. So, you are given these three functional dependencies what you need to do is you need to identify what a plus will be. Erion please do that I will just be back in a minute. Okay. Just happened before I went out right not for the entire session for the entire session it was on. Okay. Now, now I have the next attribute which is the restaurant ID what can restaurant ID give me. So, restaurant ID can give me the restaurant name. Great. Now, I have the menu item ID what can the menu item ID give me? Menu item name and item price. And then a combination of both of these what can this give me this can give me the quantity. So, now my question to all of you present in the session will be everybody present in the session here if you carefully see can I say all this list of attributes that I mentioned in these functional dependencies can we derived with just these two which is order ID and menu item ID. Can everybody give me a yes this makes sense to all of you present in the session is there any attribute that is not a part of our attribute closure. All the attributes are a part of my attribute closure right yes. So, this becomes a super key. Now, I have to check whether the super key is a candidate key or not meaning is this a minimal set or not. And that is why I asked you the question which is if I remove any one of these for example, let us say if I remove the order ID will it be possible for me get the quantity of the items ordered in that particular order just by looking at the menu item ID no or if I order remove the menu item ID will it be possible for me to fetch all the order details the restaurant name the customer name and everything using the menu item ID no which means that this also is the minimal super key which means the candidate key for all of the attributes present in these functional dependencies. Everybody a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody. Super now what have we done here in the what we have done here is that given a list of functional dependencies what we did was we assumed a group of attributes to be our candidate key and once we have assumed that we created a closure set of those attributes or closure set of these set of attributes to validate whether this is a candidate key or not. So it is okay to intuitively guess what a key for a particular table can be but it is very very important for you to use the functional dependencies to validate whether it is a correct candidate key or not. We should not assume the primary keys automatically can everybody give me thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session. Second important mistake that people make is or common mistake that people make is while creating the closure set people do not remove or people do not include the transitive dependencies meaning a is dependent on b b is dependent on c is dependent on sorry b depends on a c depends on b d depends on c meaning d indirectly depends on a as well. So these transitive dependencies you should include right and closure needs to be computed for all the attributes all the way up till the end till no more new attributes can be added meaning a complete closure needs to be computed. Everybody a thumbs up if attribute closure as a concept is crystal clear to all of you a thumbs down if this does not make sense to anybody present in the session. That's great. So up until now what we have discussed this we have discussed what functional dependencies are now we understand what functional dependencies are now we understand what closure of a set of attribute means and now we also know how we can identify the candidate keys using those closures or how we can verify if a set of attributes I'm calling to be my candidate key is a correct eligible candidate key or not right. This brings me up to the next topic of discussion which is normalization. So what is normalization again as we have discussed at the beginning of the session normalization is what is the main topic of discussion all of the things that we have discussed so far before normalization are just going to be used in this to correctly perform normalization of our database normalization is reorganizing the data present or organizing the data in a structured way to ensure we don't have duplicacies present meaning to reduce duplicacies as much as possible in order to avoid the anomalies in the database right. Now normalization has four stages everyone again let me repeat myself normalization does not have four types normalization has four stages Paneetala Patidali Adrakdala Chakka Ritali. Then it will be a child right four stages of normalization what are the four stages of normalization the four stages of normalization are one NF two NF three NF and BC NF BC NF okay. So whenever a database is given to you right these normalizations are applied serial we start by checking if a database is present in the first normal form or not. If it is present in the first normal form then we go to the second normal form and check if database is present in the second normal form or not then the third form and then at the end BC NF. But the most important thing that you need to understand is that a completely normalized database is not the best database that you can build normalization problem problems for us might create new problems. So how much of normalization needs to be applied is again a business decision or a trade-off. Everybody can you give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session there is no fixed answer of this is the best database design for a schema. Everything depends on where these needs to be optimized the most frequent operations in which systems on which API we reduced all of that. Now what is the problem that normalization brings into the picture normalization will generally break down your large table into smaller tables. Now whenever you will break down your large table into smaller tables what you will need to do is to get all the data in one place you will have to use joins and joins are very expensive meaning the time to query will increase. So complete normalization is not always the best database depending on the use case and the requirement we have to see how much of a normalization needs to be applied to a system. With that let's first talk about the first normal form we just going to discuss one NF in today session two NF three NF in BCNF we're going to talk about in the next session with examples from the second schema that we are going to be discussing which is the hospital management system schema. So let's first talk about what one NF or the first normal form is. If we discuss one NF two NF two NF then we will end the session. Very simple first normal form is very simple. What is the first normal form everyone? First normal form simply talks about a relation in the first normal form a relation is in a first normal form if every attribute contains atomic values and repeating groups are eliminated. For example when we were talking about our restaurants table one attribute that we were discussing in the restaurants table was cuisine right and there are multiple ways that we discussed to store cuisine in the restaurants table. First one was to store it in the form of a varcare where each cuisine will be a comma separated substring in that bigger string right. But is that a good way to store multiple or multi-valued attribute is a single attribute in any table everyone? What problems can happen because of this? The biggest problem that can happen because of this is unoptimized searching. To search if Chinese as a cuisine is present in any particular restaurant or not you cannot apply any sort of search optimization on the basis of the cuisine. What you will have to do is you will have to ultimately scan all the restaurants and for each restaurant you will have to scan the entire cuisine table entire cuisine attribute and perform a searching on a string which is again not optimal at all right and hence this is not a correct or a good design to store the data. Let's look at one more example. So, let's say if this is how I created my orders table order ID customer name and ordered items where what I do is I put all of the items that I have ordered together in one table. Something like this. Is this a good design or a good way to store an order in the database? Everybody present in the session yes or no? Yes, one. Is this a good way to store the design or is this a good design or good way to store an order in my database? No, why? Why not? Again the reason why it is not important, why it is not good is firstly querying becomes very difficult. Searching in a string will become very very difficult. If you want to find out all the orders from pizza edge going to become very very difficult. Second is updating will become very very difficult. Let's say today this item is called as burger. Tomorrow I want to change the name of this item to a veg burger. First of all what I will have to do is I will have to find out all the orders in which burger is an item is present and then secondly what I will have to do is I will have to make an update in a string which itself is not a good way to handle. String manipulation becomes very very dangerous. And again scalability problems for example if you talk about a very large order where let's say you have 20, 30, 40 items present in one single order. The length of the string will become too large right item names can become very very large. The schema can become very messy right. Fourth problem is data integrity gets broken here. In this particular string everyone can I say if there is a is there a possibility that pizza can come two times and there is no way to check if duplicacy is present or not. Meaning? Can I write down the value of ordered items in the form of a string like this as well? Everybody present in the session yes or no? Yes is there a way to avoid this or check this? No there is no way to avoid this or check this right and that is why it is very critical for a database to be present in a 1 and f first normal from and how will we break down the database into a first normal form? Here what I will do is simply I will create a separate table which will talk about restaurant cuisines in which I will use the restaurant ID as the foreign key okay and cuisine name for that restaurant where I will insert all the cuisines for that particular restaurant into that restaurant cuisine table. Similarly here also for this we have already solved this by creating a separate order item table in which I will have the order ID the name or the menu item ID and again along with that I will also be able to store the other metadata for example the quantity of the items stored or the item ordered. Here I do not even have the flexibility to store the quantity of the item order. Everybody thumbs up if the first normal form is crystal clear to all of you thumbs down if it is not making sense to anybody present in the session. Super. Everyone do not worry you will see a lot of examples for the first normal form, second normal form questions on this okay. Now for a database to be present in the second normal form the first condition is that the database should be in the first normal form. So for a second normal form the database should be in the first normal form and the second condition is that no non-prime attribute depends on only part of a composite candidacy. Let me explain this to all of you present in the session okay. So what I have is I have this order details table okay. Now for this order details table everyone I had these functional dependencies given to me based on these functional dependencies I identified that the order ID and the menu item ID are going to be my candidate key. Can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you present in the session yes or no. Yes these are my candidate keys. Now in this particular case everyone in this particular case a database is not in a two normal form if some of the attributes of the table depends partially on the candidate key meaning if you look at this particular table and the attribute order date is order date dependent on order ID and menu item ID both of them everyone yes or no everybody yes or no is order date dependent on order ID and menu item ID both of them no right it depends only and only on the order ID a partial candidate key right and second normal form says that this should not be present in your database why because this is what creates redundancy when odd ID and menu item ID both combine together form the candidate key I can say that there will be multiple entries in this table with the same order ID but a different menu item ID and for each of those attributes for each of those records the order date will be a redundant column order date will be a redundant attributant that is what your two NF avoids second normal form simply says that they should not be any attributes present in the table that are partially dependent on the candidate key if they are present remove them and create another table everybody present in the session can you give me a thumbs up if two NF is crystal clear to all of you thumbs down if it does not make sense to anybody present in the session yes so what will be the different tables that will be created here the first table that will be created is the order stable right how there are multiple attributes that were given to us in the functional in the functional dependencies given which are only dependent on the order right which will your order ID order date customer ID in the restaurant ID then there will be a menu item stable because there were a lot of attributes that were dependent on your menu item ID only menu item ID menu item name and the item price and then everyone finally what we are going to have is we are going to have an order items table in which we have only that attribute present which is dependent on the complete candidate key and not apart or partial candidate key can everybody give me a thumbs up if this makes sense to all of you a thumbs down if it's not making sense to anybody present in the session yes super with that people first of all that is it from my side in today